

: C =r ' -" = :
r - YANG”
« V I IV
BY
HARDY WILSON


A
v\
n I
n -v t)
V










©
“YIN-YANG”
HARDY WILSON
PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHOR AT
FLOWERDALE. TASMANIA


THIS EDITION
IS LIMITED TO
FIVE HUNDRED
COPIES
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
J. Welch & Sons Pty. Ltd.,
130 Macquarie Street, Hobart, Tasmania


I do not suppose that this story is a work of
art of a superior kind. Nevertheless, it has the
essential quality, which is truth. And it has, too,
something of the essential to religion; love and
respect for mankind.
The stories are selected from a series told to a
small boy at bed-time. He has not forgotten them,
which perhaps is a tribute of more worth than
they deserve, but helps to overcome diffidence
about printing the book for the pleasure of grown
persons.
Fifteen years have passed since the telling, years
in which many things that seemed far-fetched to a
conventional person have become everyday events,
and none more noticeable than the aeroplane. The
journey of the “ Yin-Yang ” round the world has
become a commonplace with modern planes, and
traders are plying across the continents. Only the
method of propulsion still remains unknown, and
even that may be solved at any time.
I do not believe that the book contains anything
impossible. The human mind is unable to conceive
impossibilities. And I flatter myself that it sets
forth accurately the adventures of Chih-hu and his
comrades as told to a wonder-loving boy.
HARDY WILSON.
“ Celestion,” 1934.




“YIN-YANG”
CHAPTER ONE
WHEREIN IS GIVEN A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF A
PROFESSOR, A ROSE MASTER, AND AN ELEPHANT,
IN PEIPING, AND OF THEIR DEPARTURE FOR
THE SOUTH.
CHIH-HU sat under a leafy tree in the garden
behind his house, which faced the street of the
Well of Sweet Water at Peiping. He wondered
how to earn some money. With the passing of the
Imperial Court of China, his position as Regulator
of the Calendar had come to an end, and the
starting of the Republic drove him to the Univer-
sity of Peiping, where he learnt to speak English,
and to write it with ease, and become Professor of
Prehistory in that institution. Unfortunately, the
University of Peiping possessed little wealth, and
it became clear to Chih-hu that he must acquire a
living.
At that time the Professor of Prehistory was of
middle-age and dwelt alone attended by his faithful
cook Wu Chih. Coming from a family which orig-
inally belonged to Chang-an, in Shensi, Chih-hu
mingled in his veins the blood of ancestors who
had attended to the Calendar since its inception, at
the beginning of civilization, with that of Confu-
cianists who, during battles, quoted the sayings of
the Sage. Before reaching thirty, he was appointed
Regulator of the Calendar, a task which he filled
with ability, chrysanthemums, in particular, open-
ing into flower on the day named by the Regulator.
As Professor of Prehistory he filled gaps in


knowledge of earliest times, perhaps because he
was, by nature, a poet. And he found in the
strangeness of adventures things he did not know.
When it was a question of adventure, he forgot
everything, even the necessity to earn a livelihood.
This inconsistency is the happiest and best of
things. There is no poetry except in desire for the
impossible, or regret for the irreparable. His talent
in seeking adventures was natural to him, and his
love of philosophy and history aided him in the
task.
In stature he was small. Indeed, the Master of
the “Yin-Yang” once remarked that some day a
breath of wind would carry him off the deck, flut-
tering like an autumn leaf back to the land from
whence he came. Although small of body, he pos-
sessed a mind akin to his name, Chih-hu, which
means Luminous Wisdom.
Attached to the Professor, following him where-
ever he went, was a small white elephant, not more
than three feet six inches high. Lan-yen-ti Shiao
Pei Shiang, which means “Little White Elephant
with Eye of Heaven Blue,” was his court title, but
Chang Li Heng, meaning potentiality, utility and
beauty, was his name in ordinary use, usually
referred to as Chang.
Chang Li Heng was of great age, but exactly
how old he was nobody knew. He sprang in direct
descent from the first of his line who, about the
year 2350 8.C., was appointed by the great Yao to
be servitor to the General Regulator of the Imperial
Calendar, and was made Keeper of the two Calen-
dar Trees which grew in the Imperial Courtyard.
Of these trees, one put forth a leaf every day for
half-a-month, and then a leaf fell each day for half-


a-month. The other grew a leaf each month for
half-a-year and then a leaf dropped every month
for half-a-year. Thus a glance at the trees told the
day and the month. It was the duty of Chang’s
ancestors to gather the leaves as they fell, and post
them at the Imperial Courtyard gate, so that the
populace would know the day and the month.
Unhappily, the Calendar Trees disappeared —in
what manner history does not relate and the
species became extinct.
In the eyes of some modern people, they were
symbolical trees, re-awakening creativeness not
having progressed so far as in ancient periods,
when the propagation of shrubs with a limited
number of leaves was not difficult in a land where
leaves grow and fall to the day.
But the elephants lived on and became noted for
their blue eyes which, according to tradition, were
ascribed to reflection of the sky when counting the
leaves on the Calendar Trees. At any rate, Wan-li,
an Emperor of the early Ming dynasty, who
excelled as a patron of blue and white porcelain,
commanded that the blue of his wares should match
the Court elephant’s eyes. Which is the origin of
Ming blue, the secret having vanished leaving the
blue in elephants’ eyes, and in Chang’s it is diffi-
cult to imagine a more beautiful colour.
According to ancient tales, it was the custom of
the Court elephants, after the loss of the Calendar
Trees, to inscribe the day and the month on the
palace gates, thus laying the foundation of a fluent
style of writing, which reached its best in the
eighth century when the Emperor Ming Huang,
who was devoted to accomplishments in the arts,
wrote a poem praising the writing of the Court


elephant of his time. It is not known how the ele-
phants learnt to inscribe, although it was, most
likely, an exceedingly slow learning, passing from
one to another and gradually expanding until, at
last, they were able to express themselves in archaic
ideograms, which is much simpler than the modern
style.
Like his ancestors, Chang Li Heng inherited the
power to transmit some of his thoughts by means
of two short bamboo sticks, his tusks—which were
tipped with vermilion bounded by a ring of gold—
and his trunk. His archaic characters expressing
thoughts, not words, so rapidly that it often was
difficult to follow the movement. A beautiful
phrase in written words has no equal in the spoken.
And it was with no uncertain pleasure that Chih-hu
preferred Chang’s writing to most speech. A pre-
dilection that could not be accounted for altogether
by a natural love of letters, because Chang did not
use ink and paper but wrote in the air.
As he wrote thus, in the archaic Chinese style,
it was easy to imagine his thoughts full of wisdom,
and never dull, in much the same way that one
invests the remarks of a person, in an unknown
tongue, with an interest which knowledge, prob-
ably, would destroy. To Chih, however, Chang’s
writing presented no difficulties. He read it as
easily as one does a book and, in the course of their
long association, it became so familiar that Chang
clipped his characters, knowing well that a swift
gesture with his trunk would convey a thought
which, expressed in full character, or ideogram,
must have taken several curves and balances with
his sticks to express.
In order to attract and to retain attention, Chang


uses his ears, by waving them gently or briskly,
and his trunk, with the gesture of an orator. He
has subtleties of thought which contrast with the
rotundity of his build and, as he is always master
of his calligraphy, he confines it within the limits
of his technique, and so arranges that he never has
need of the voice which he lacks. It would not be
true to say that he performs a surprising feat with
his instruments. That would be false praise. His
characters have an ease of delivery which one takes
as a matter of course. They please by their exact-
ness and facility. Sometimes one is a little amazed
by their extent. Yet, remembering the intelligence
of elephants in general, Chang’s gift is interesting,
lending itself naturally to an eloquent as well as a
good literary style. He writes the words of an
elephant of thought and taste.
Over his ivory coloured skin, Chang wore, in
summer, a thin shirt of dolichos cloth which was
supplemented with a vest, lined in hare’s fur, when
the weather turned cold. His eyes preserved the
candour of childhood, in spite of his great age,
perhaps because he had never tried to earn money.
He was scrupulously clean, and his writing instru-
ments were without a speck of dust. In short,
Chang is a privileged being who has lived in times
more illustrious than our own. Yet he has not
become old fashioned and is still full of illusions,
and, moreover, seems to hover between the real
and the unreal, showing that there is as much truth
in the unreal as in the obvious. What a pity that
Chang could not write his memoirs on paper. We
should recognise in the pages of this humble ele-
phant ourselves, in spite of the pride of our intellect.
Following ancient tradition, Chang Li Heng was


appointed servitor to Chih-hu when he became
Regulator of the Calendar, and the two became so
attached to each other that on the declaration of
the Republic, Chih had no difficulty in taking
Chang to his home, where he became a trusted
companion. Never once, during his days of poverty,
did Chih think of parting with Chang, and when the
time came to proceed abroad the elephant was taken
with him.
Devoted to Chang, even as much as Chang was
devoted to Chih, was an old man who had been,
formerly, Rose Master in the Imperial Gardens at
Nanking. Wu Chih was his name, which means
Infinite Resources. There was a gentle melancholy
about Wu Chih which seemed to come from leaving
the Rose Gardens, as he had to do because he was
no Republican. Nothing could have been more in-
tolerable to him than a modern democracy. He
was, however, an admirable cook, and was learned
in the ancient dishes of China, where cooking has
always been a great art. There was not a dish
mentioned in the lines of Tu Fu which he could
not have served perfectly. And he loved to quote
the words of Yuan Mei, who, like himself, had been
a Rose Master as well as a cook, in the eighteenth
century. Perhaps the former position of Regulator
of the Calendar had something to do with the
regard which he showed for Chih-hu on entering
his household. At any rate he became attached to
him, and Chih did all that he could to make the
old man’s life agreeable by giving him the prepara-
tion of a fine dinner whenever he could afford it.
While Chih-hu ransacked his mind for an idea
which might produce a little wealth, Wu Chih came
to the garden and announced that an European


gentleman would be honoured to see him. This
gentleman was Mr. Lowcough, of the Intrepid
Insurance Company, who, having explained to Chih
how great the risk of fire and how simple it would
be to insure against it, urged him to take out a
policy on his house in the company which he
represented. Chih-hu, knowing nothing about in-
surance, followed his advice, imagining that if the
worst came to pass he could set fire to his house
and collect the amount it was insured against.
A few months later Chih, having sold the last of
his books, and having nothing of any value left,
set his house ablaze and when it was reduced to
ashes went to the insurance office, which stood near
the Hatamen Gate, and asked to be paid for it.
When the manager, Mr. Waterhole, wanted to
know how the house came to be burnt, Chih replied
that he had set fire to it because he needed some
money. This reply, uttered with engaging frank-
ness, appealed to Mr. Waterhole, who, soon after-
wards, on learning that Chih was left penniless and
without means of earning a living, appointed him
as an agent for the company. So expert and
dependable did Chih become in this profession that
the Intrepid Insurance Company transferred him to
Shanghai, where he began to ponder on fighting
flames from the air, aeroplanes being increasingly
serviceable.
Here they dwelt in a flat on Nanking Road, for,
of course, Wu Chih and Chang came with him, and
Chih did his best to save enough to put a little by.
But try as he would, there was never more than
sufficient to support the establishment.
It was the custom of Wu Chih to go, during the
morning, to the river which lay near the Nanking


Road, where from the fishermen he bought fish on
the way to market.. One morning he set out on
this errand with a sad heart, because he knew that
he would have to buy the cheapest fish when his
mind was full of the Eight Delicacies of the Old.
Having made his purchase, he regretted it, and
turned to the Bund with the intention of going to
the office to ask Chih for enough to buy condiments
with which he intended to make a sauce in which
the insignificant fish could be hidden. As he
crossed a street leading to the Bund a ricksha,
turning the corner at a rapid pace, caught the fish,
which was suspended on a string, and knocked it
from his hand. Much to his surprise, the man in
the ricksha stopped his coolie and turned with an
apology. Wu said that the fish was of no import-
ance, and its loss was a benefit, but the stranger
did not fail to see that the accident meant more
than was admitted. Moreover, he recognised in
the old Rose Master that proud spirit which poverty
could not efface. Thereupon, he invited Wu to
share a meal that evening. But Wu Chih, with ad-
mirable politeness, suggested that food taken at
his house would be more beneficial, since he would
be able to cook it. Perceiving this enthusiasm for
cooking, and guessing that Wu was too poor to
afford much of it, the stranger agreed on condition
that he was allowed to supply the food. To which
Wu, after politely protesting, submitted.
That evening the stranger, Renor Brighten Airey,
Commander in the Celestion and Shanghai aero-
plane service, appeared at the flat and, meeting
Chih-hu, found a mind as alive to possibilities in
the air as he was to productions on land. After the
dinner, which Wu Chih cooked to perfection, and


contrived to include a modern interpretation of
some of Tu Fu’s favourite dishes, the three men,
with Chang in attendance, took the air on the Bund,
overlooking the river, the evening being warm in-
doors. “It is strange,” said Brighten Airey, “to
think of the days when Chinese and Europeans
were worlds apart. The conquest of the air swept
away those barriers which existed between peoples,
and the air is becoming a universal means of trade
and communication.”
“Nevertheless,” replied Chih, “fires are still
fought with engines on the ground, which is out
of date in these days,”
“ Not at all,” said Brighten Airey. “ China is
concerned with traditions of the past, whereas
Celestion is busy making them, and flying fire-
engines are as common as the bright liquid.”
This remark appealed to Chih, who saw the
opportunity of introducing flying engines to com-
bat fires in China, which were of common occur-
rence. And he knew that his chances of acquiring
higher positions in the company were limited,
while, moreover, his adventurous spirit led him on,
until he decided to fly to Celestion and acquire
familiarity with the fire-engines and their ways
which could then be installed in China.
Three days later, with Wu Chih and Chang,
having settled affairs in Shanghai, under the guid-
ance of Brighten Airey they boarded his plane
Upper Blue ” and set forth for the south.


CHAPTER TWO
WHICH CONTAINS A DESCRIPTION OF A CITY
WHICH SURPASSES THE NORTH IN LOVELINESS
BUT FALLS SHORT IN THE ELEGANCE OF ITS
COOKING.
THE “ Upper Blue,” being an amphibian plane,
followed a course never far from the sea, and
collected freight and passengers at Hongkong and
Singapore, passing thence to Batavia, and so to
Darwin. In the eyes of Chih-hu, the first sight
of Australia was not agreeable. Darwin appeared
as a ramshackle place with a population of Malays,
Southern Chinese, and a handful of Europeans who
dwelt in the tropical air without rejoicing.
A few days later, passing southwards along the
east coast, on a sunny morning the “ Upper Blue ”
entered between low headlands the harbour at
Celestion. As she turned towards the city, the
notes of an orchestra playing “Australia Will Be
There ” came from the top of a cliff, opposite the
entrance, where a blue dome rose behind a marble
palisade. It was the crematorium, where the ashes
of Renor John Tarry, the late Prime Minister, who
had chosen this as his favourite song, were cast
into the water. Chih-hu was a little shocked when
Brighton Airey asked him which tune he would
prefer when cremated, the orchestra being accus-
tomed to playing airs from all countries. Celestion,
he perceived, was a city where ideas were different
from China, in death as in life, and as the ‘ Upper
Blue ” came to rest on a small semi-circular bay, he
determined to master the new civilization which
was opening before him.


Arranging to call that evening, Brighten Airey
secured a guide who took Chih-hu, with Wu Chih
and Chang following, to the Inn of the Singing
Bowl, where the publican, Renor Loveibond, made
them comfortable and, having partaken of lunch,
Chih proceeded to view the city.
Emerging from the Inn, and passing along the
street, where no vehicles could be seen, there being
no central roadway, the people, he noticed, were
attired in smocks of azure blue, adorned with
golden geese, embroidered on the breast, and white
trousers. The smocks on the women were longer
and their trousers fitted closer at the ankles. Some
of the men, evidently of an official class, wore blue
silken smocks with gold braid on the sleeves, while
the mass wore cotton. All the men wore rabbit
fur hats peaked at the top, and dyed red in honour
of the “Revolution” which had led to new creative-
ness, while the women’s hair was coiled high on
their heads and capped with a tiny “ creation ” of
various shades. There was not much difference in
the style of dress between China and Celestion,
save that the phoenix replaced the goose.
The architecture was more beautiful than any he
had seen in the streets of Peiping. From corner to
corner of the street blocks, a great eaves ran in
unbroken line, and at the angles mounted in
splendid sweep upwards, which showed descent
from the T’ang style of Northern China. Wide
rafters of azure blue framed circular panels, dec-
orated with emblems in gold and gay colours which
were seals of the trades carried on in the shops
below. Under the eaves, a broad fascia ran the
length of the block filled with animals, fruit, flowers
and insects, in gold and gorgeous hues, represent-


ing the origin of the trade, and divided into panels
over the shop beneath by carved standards in gold.
The walls were creamy white, broken by vermilion
columns attached to the wall, and crowned by
carved heads, supporting the standards in the
frieze and signifying, in gold, the star of the Zodiac
which guided the destiny of the trade beneath.
Between these columns, on the upper floors, were
windows framed with blue shutters on which
devices of flowers and insects were carved and
painted. A broad beam over the shop was carved
and decorated in gold, with a circle at the centre
inscribed with the trade carried on and the pro-
prietor’s name. From the underside of this beam
hung awnings of azure blue material, shading the
shop windows, which were framed in small sec-
tions, between carved and gilded supports, and
showing goods which reminded Chih-hu of long
past days in his native land, yet with a Grecian
subtlety.
At the corners of the blocks, under the mounting
eaves, were richly carved shields containing, on
deep blue backgrounds, golden stars representing
the groups and constellations in the heavens, which
gave their names to the sections. Chih learnt to
know where stood Venus, or the Bull, and also the
placing of the stars following the plan of the sky.
Passing two or three of these blocks, and crossing
a wide street where the vehicles, often under blue
silk awnings, had wheels of vermilion, sometimes
carved and decorated in gold, and propelled at a
leisurely speed, making no sound, except the tink-
ling of toned bells, a circular space appeared where,
at the centre of a ring of official buildings was the
House of Deliberation, crowned with a roof of


heaven-blue tiles, and ending in a finial of gold
which represented the spirit of man approaching
the unknowable. This House, like the buildings
surrounding it, was circular on plan, but of greater
circumference, and its roof, which was the highest
in Celestion, had tiles of deeper blue than those on
the offices around which, in turn, were of deeper
hue than on the city buildings. Thus, from the air
the blue of Celestion roofs grew paler as they
neared the earth.
Accustomed though he had been to lovely colours
in China, Chih was delighted, and remembering his
days as Professor of Prehistory, in Peiping, asked
the way to the University of Celestion. On the
further side of the administrative circle, he found a
path overhung with Ho-ho trees, laden with blos-
soms, which fell and covered the pathway. As he
proceeded along this path, which was bordered with
gardens, the prevailing hues of the city appeared in
golden white walls, between vermilion columns,
under roofs of blue. At the end of the path was
a wide stone-flagged space, across which stood the
University. Entering through a doorway with ver-
milion doors, on which were circles containing
carved tortoises in gold, symbols of wisdom, Chih
found himself in a vast circular space surrounded
in an unbroken ring with colleges, each with ver-
milion doors carved with gilded symbols of their
learning, and nowhere higher than the prevailing
height of the town. In the centre of this space
was a low structure of white marble, circular on
plan, and containing nothing but a floor of blue tiles
deeper in hue than any he had seen. This floor
reflected, on a clear day, the blue of the empyrean.
And here, he learnt, the Chancellor appeared on the


coming of spring and appealed to the Supreme
Ultimate for guidance.
Beyond the University lay an aerodrome where,
evening approaching, planes were taking the
workers to their homes on a distant line of blue
hills. Chih returned to the Inn desiring to see
Celestion from the air, where he imagined the
prospect would be even more beautiful.
Dinner, served under the direction of Renor
Loveibond, with Brighten Airey as his guest, while
a simple meal, included some dishes for which
Celestion held repute. First came rock oysters on
shell, Celestion being noted for the delicacy, then
turtle soup, quail on toast, and various dishes of
meats and vegetables, with Minchinbury wine to
drink. Brighten Airey extolled the cooking with
pride in his city. Wu Chih, however, remained
polite but silent, until asked, point-blank, what he
thought of the repast.
“ Literature, painting, architecture, and all the
kindred arts,” he said, “ followed cycles in which
they are now at another blossoming. Cooking be-
gan with the first discovery of fire, and has con-
tinued ever since, without falling back, because it
is the supreme art in which two peoples have
proved their supremacy, and have led all others
through days which, otherwise, were without signi-
ficance. France led the European world and China
the Eastern.
“ These dishes of Celestion,” he continued, “ owe
their elegance to France. When the cooking of
China begins to illuminate the dishes of this city,
perhaps the art may eclipse those which now adorn
it. In China, Tu Fu, of Chang-an, was a supreme
poet but a much better cook. Some of his dishes,


and taste in wines, have descended to us, which
appeal to a perceptive palate. The dishes of Yuan
Mei graced the eighteenth century of China and the
cloak which fell on Brillat Savarin, in France, was
spread over a dozen cooks in China where the art
remains supreme.”
Although a little crestfallen, when Chih-hu
remarked that good cooking requires cash, Brighten
Airey suggested that Celestion engines, which con-
trolled the fires when out-of-hand, were without
match in the Pacific world, and, perhaps, a sight of
them might lead to the necessary cash.
Together they left the Inn and proceeded west-
wards, over a slight knoll, until they emerged on
an open space facing the water of an inlet which
lay in the midst of the city. Here were grouped
fire planes and fire boats ready to attend to out-
breaks, which were telephoned from a high tower
overlooking the city and its environs, which had
been a support of an immense bridge across the
water in the dark days. Entering a building which
housed the planes, Brighten Airey introduced Fire-
fighter Silverdew, who commanded the station.
Silverdew speedily saw that Chih was interested,
and learning of his experience with fires in Shang-
hai, and desire to obtain further experience in the
art of fire fighting, as practiced in Celestion, was
delighted to find him a position on his staff.
Next morning, having presented Brighten Airey
with a rose crystal swallow for the nose of the
“ Upper Blue,” as a mark of his esteem, Chih
led the way to the fire station where, having ob-
tained a small upper floor apartment in a house
nearby, and made arrangements with Wu Chih


about their meals, and care of Chang, he entered
on his duties.
His rise was quick. Willing to undertake any
task at any hour, and being naturally agreeable to
everyone, quick to master the technique of his craft,
and always watching for suggestions and applying
them where possible, Chih found himself at the end
of a year, fire controller of a fire plane. Moreover,
Chang had become a favourite with the staff, who
rejoiced in his blue dolichos gown and ivory skin,
which they averred were true Celestian colours, and
Chih had no difficulty in taking him often on expe-
ditions to outbreaks. Only the uniform upset
Chih a little. Throughout his life he had worn a
gown of black silk, and the change to a red smock
adorned with golden geese, and white trousers,
above glossy black boots, which was the firemen’s
uniform, was not to his taste, nor did the helmets
of polished brass suit his complexion. However,
they were in harmony with the scarlet and gold of
the fire planes, and agreeable to most.
He soon became accustomed to the title of renor,
which supplanted the former term of mister, a
weakened form of master, and meant, in Chinese,
“ ren ” for man, and “ ora ” the Italian for gold,
given in full to woman as renora, and clipped when
applied to man.
And Wu Chih was contented. He had found
markets where, at dawn, were assembled luscious
melons, fruit and vegetables, chickens and sucking
pigs, fish and lobsters, and, nearby, a street of
condiments, with which he followed the arts of Tu
Fu and sometimes wrote verses in praise of them.


CHAPTER THREE
WHEREIN AN OPOSSUM ESTABLISHES THOUGHT
WITH AN ELEPHANT, THEREBY UNITING TWO
CONTINENTS.
CHANG LI HENG, the diminutive elephant,
learnt to make himself useful at the fires
which he attended with his master Chih-hu. His
agility and use of his trunk made him so efficient
that the firemen came to regard his presence as
invaluable. Moreover, his small frame was exceed-
ingly powerful, and the interest he took in handling
the hose left nothing to be desired. Consequently,
the time came when he accompanied Chih on every
alarm which his master attended.
One night, when the sun had set over the distant
mountain range, and the air was still and warm,
and bats were flying up and down the runway to
the fire station, busily engaged in catching the
insects of a summer’s night, word was telephoned
from the signal station reporting a fire in a home-
stead by the river at Richmond. Chih-hu’s plane
was ordered to attend to it.
Within ten minutes the fire plane had landed
beside an old house, which stood behind a row of
tall poplars, facing the Kurrajong Road, and began
spraying the flames with fire drench as no water
was available. But the fire had gained too strong
a hold and the homestead was doomed. Chih-hu
directed the firemen to help save what possessions
could be carried from the house, and, followed by
Chang, climbed through the pantry window and
handed out plates and dishes to the elephant, who
placed them beyond risk of falling walls. While


Chih approached the window with a load of Nan-
king blue, to his amazement Chang suddenly dashed
away. Thereupon, fearing that something was
amiss, Chih dropped the plates and ran after him.
When he found Chang, standing by the poplars
facing the road, a strange little animal was sitting
on his neck. It was Pi Po the opossum.
There now occurred a scene which only a Chinese
of the old school could easily understand. It
required complete agreement with Nature. In the
light of the burning house, Chang repeated a story
on his sticks which was told by the opossum, but
told without movement, his eyes alone flickering
over the elephant’s head. And Chih-hu watched
and read in silence.
Long ago, when the pioneer built the old home-
stead with walls of stone, and a shingled roof, he
cut down the trees around and planted an orchard.
Two opossums who had dwelt in a gnarled apple-
gum, which grew between the house and the river,
found their way into the roof through the eaves
over the pantry window. Here they decided to
make their new home and chose a secluded spot
over the family parlour. In course of time, the
children they bore produced grandchildren, and all
settled in the roof. When the shadows deepened,
they awoke and went forth to the orchard, or the
fields, in search of food, and afterwards to play,
returning to the roof when the first glimmer of
coming day glowed in the eastern sky.
One of these grandchildren was a queer little
opossum. He loved to sit by the centreflower in
the parlour ceiling, listening to talk issuing from
below. As he grew older this became a settled
custom, and, in course of time, he learnt to dis-


tinguish between certain sounds. He was joined
by his son, who had the same curiosity. Thus, after
many generations, this family of opossums learnt
to understand words coming from the centreflower.
And they sat and listened to talk about merino
sheep, and rust in wheat, of horses, and cattle, and
floods, and droughts, until, in the person of this
small opossum, they had little difficulty in fol-
lowing talk in the room below.
This night, after the opossums had left the roof
to scale the trees in the orchard, Pi Po, as he was
called, to whom voices issuing from the parlour
had a lively attraction, was listening to a political
argument between the master of the house and a
member of the House of Deliberation, about the
latest enactment which decreed that men should
work on three days in the week.
“ It is all hokus-pokus,” cried the Member, “ this
cutting down of the people’s working hours on the
score that it enables them to become better edu-
cated. On Sunday we take the open air; on Satur-
day we have music; on Friday, religion; and now
we are to have literature all day on Thursday in-
stead of the afternoon, which we never wanted.
One of these days the Council of the Upper Seven
will be wanting to do away with labour altogether!
“ But tell me, what has the worker to do with
literature?” he cried, banging the table with his
fist.
“ Oh! as for that,” replied the master of the
house, “ nowadays, a man cannot get anywhere in
the city without being a writer. The first thing a
man should acquire is a literary style. Without it
he has no chance at all. And you must admit that


Thursday afternoon did not produce the results that
were expected of it.”
“ No! and it never would! ” cried the Member.
At this point loud cries called the occupants of
the parlour. The house was on fire, and before Pi
Po knew what to do the roof was full of smoke.
It blinded him as he dashed about trying to find
the hole in the eaves over the pantry window,
which led to a downpipe. Soon flames broke into
the roof and Pi Po was choking when he found the
hole. He scrambled through and with his smoke-
blinded eyes saw a whitish patch below and leaped
for it. Landing on the neck of Chang, who was
waiting at the pantry window for the next load of
plates, he clung to him too terrified to move. Then
a strange thing happened. Chang dashed away
with Pi Po on his back. The elephant was suscep-
tible to the thought of the opossum.
When Chih found the pair by the poplars on the
road, a clear understanding had been established,
and what proved a lasting friendship. Chang de-
clared that Pi Po having lost his home, desired
nothing better than to come with them. And Chih,
knowing that the little opossum understood Eng-
lish, could not find it in his heart to refuse. So
Pi Po joined the crew of the fire plane and returned
to Celestion in their company. He was given a box
on the balcony beside the elephant, and when he
appeared the next evening Chang said, on his sticks,
that Pi Po would soon become Pip to all who knew
him.
Pi Po was a small opossum of the ring-tailed
variety, with a beautiful coat of black fur. Usually
he slept through the day and emerged at sundown,
and often in the evenings when Chih was on duty,


Chang would follow him to the station with Pip
perched on his neck. Although he became friendly
with Chih-hu, and particularly with Wu Chih who
fed him, Pip’s devotion to Chang was remarkable.
In this there was nothing strange.
Although children, and some grown persons, are
aware of animals addressing each other, neither
Chang nor Pip could utter a word, except in their
own language, which the one had no difficulty in
understanding in the other. As everyone knows,
dogs, by their long association with man, are able
to communicate some of their thoughts by means
of barking. The dog, in a wild state, is not particu-
larly intelligent—certainly not so wise as an ele-
phant, who in captivity exhibits a higher under-
standing. And there is no reason why an opossum,
under similar conditions, should not become as
communicative as a dog. Indeed, Pi Po’s voice
was much more like a human voice, especially in
those expressive notes, which are not unlike the
grunts of a small pig, and which, as Wu Chih ob-
served, reminded him of the sweet notes of an owl
which fed on mulberries in the State of Lu.
On the other hand, there is the question whether
Chih-hu, Wu Chih, and their comrades, could have
understood the remarks of an opossum. No reason
exists which could have prevented this under-
standing. An ornithologist in charge of a bird
sanctuary not far from Detroit, in the United States
of America, had succeeded in interpreting the notes
of wild geese. He was able to tell by the calls of a
bird leading a flock arriving overhead, to another
on the waters of a marsh, what remarks were made.
The leader flying overhead inquired about the state
of feed, and the bird on the marsh replied sug-


gesting, as often as not, that the feed was better a
little further on. By recording the calls and with
patience learning them, the ornithologist succeeded
in understanding the language of wild geese, whose
voice is much more difficult to an untrained ear
than the voice of animals capable of uttering
human-like sounds.
Yet although children do not find speech in ani-
mals in any way strange, grown-up persons may be
sceptical about the ability of Pi Po to understand
English. And when Chih-hu remarked that Pip
understood him perfectly, most people were inclined
to believe that he exaggerated. One does not mar-
vel at the shepherd’s dog who understands and
obeys often complex instructions from his master,
or at the horse who knows by word or sign what
is expected of him. Long familiarity has removed
surprise at such intelligence. An opossum is not
usually on terms of intimacy with persons, and
therefore has little opportunity of listening to their
talk. And even when an opportunity occurs he is
usually at his brightest when people are sound
asleep.
Pi Po had exceptional occasions for listening to
human speech. His life had been spent within
hearing of words issuing from the centreflower in
the parlour ceiling. Waking in the dusk of evening,
alert and inquisitive after the day’s sleep, he would
have gratified a curiosity, inherited from his ances-
tors, who had instituted the habit, and listened to
the talk around a dinner table which was simpler
conversation than it is in towns. Returning in the
morning, he would have been lulled to sleep by the
sound of morning prayers rising from the breakfast
table.


After this regular and pleasant schooling, listen-
ing to conversation that may often have been
illogical, heated, and ungrammatical, Chih’s lucid,
calm, and musical speech, which was acquired from
a scholarly Professor of English in the University
of Peiping, proved child’s play to Pi Po when he
paid attention to it. Nevertheless, his greatest gift
was to comprehend Nature with the simple brain
of an opossum.
No mystery was attached to the means of com-
munication between Chih, Chang and Pi Po,
except in transmission of thought from the opossum
to the elephant. Over and over again Chih-hu
addressed a question to the opossum, who, while
preserving an attitude of respectful attention, never
so much as moved the tip of one of his pricked-up
ears, nor uttered a sound, and yet, almost instantly,
Chang would give the reply on his sticks, the opos-
sum being unable to communicate an answer direct.
It was not the speed of translation from Chih’s
English to his own thought system, and transmis-
sion to Chang of a reply, that was amazing a
Swiss concierge in an hotel at Girgenti, in Sicily,
could do the same with half-a-dozen European
languages, turning a bullet-shaped head from one
to another of his questioners, of different national-
ities, with incredible agility of mind and language
it was the absence of a code or sign of any kind
between Chang and Pi Po that gave cause for be-
wilderment. Perhaps, one is inclined to believe, a
perfect transmission of thought vibrations passed
from one to the other, and an elephant is peculiarly
susceptible to thought waves from an opossum.
There is no reason why thought vibration should
be the exclusive privilege of mankind, and that


which is possible between man and man may be
highly developed amongst certain other animals
who, not having the same facility of speech, and
being naturally less garrulous, would have greater
need for some process of thought communication.
Indeed, it is an open question, and many believe,
that savages have this gift in greater degree than
civilized persons. We know that the only certain
bond between man and all other animals is suf-
fering. But there may be others. Science divides
animals into classes according to their bodily pecu-
liarities, without taking into account their mental
distinctions of which it knows nothing. Who can
say that thought telepathy is impossible between
an accomplished elephant and an inquisitive opos-
sum? At any rate, there is nothing miraculous,
or beyond the bounds of possibility, in Pi Po’s
invisible and silent communication with Chang.
Nor can the means of interchange of ideas between
the two, which made them so singular, each the
complement of the other, be regarded as an affront
to reason, without disregarding the fact that they
took, severally and together, the greatest delight in
the charm of conversation. The facility with which
thought passed from one to the other was prodi-
gious. They understood everything in a flash. Yet
their conversation, though rapid, was always judi-
cious, for Chang Li Heng, the elephant, stood for
Asia, and Pi Po, the opossum, for Australia. It
was a happy blending.


CHAPTER FOUR
CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT OF THE DISCOVERY
OF A FORCE WHICH MUST UNITE THE WORLD
BECAUSE ALL ARE PART OF IT.
CELESTION was an agreeable city, and work
on the fire planes did not become distasteful,
but Chih-hu began to consider returning to China,
having learnt enough about controlling fires to
make a start with the establishment of an insurance
office, with guarantees against fire, which he pro-
posed to effect by means of guardian planes. The
chief difficulty would be to finance the establish-
ment. His occupation had not brought close con-
tact with administrators, but he possessed by nature
a clear financial mind, and was eager to begin in a
wider world.
Consequently, he was sitting one morning sun-
ning himself on the runway before the fire station,
pondering on the future. His prospects were
dubious, and he longed for an able business mind,
when Brighten Airey appeared with a stranger.
The acquaintanceship with Brighten Airey had
broadened into a deep regard which each held for
the other, and the two hobnobbed from time to time
between flights. Chih greeted his friend and was
honoured to meet Senor Tortue.
A man of sturdy build, with a slight fullness
under his azure-blue smock, the Senor came of
Spanish ancestry. When he arrived in Celestion
from the South, he wore a beard which made him
look uncommonly like a portrait by El Greco in
the Prado at Madrid. This resemblance was so
striking that Celestians commented on it and, in


the end, growing tired of the same remarks, the
Senor cut off his beard and moustache, but now
looked exactly like a portrait by Goya in the same
collection. Thereafter he accepted his looks, and,
indeed, became a little proud of them.
Senor Tortue was engrossed in the management
of companies which sought new fields of enterprise,
and continually advanced the manufacture and
export of beautiful goods from Celestion, and intro-
duced, in return, all manner of works from abroad.
He was especially enthusiastic about widening
trade and commerce in hitherto unknown ways
throughout the world.
One of the industries which he controlled was
the manufacture of sago paste, the materials for
which were grown in New Guinea. Unfortunately,
a volcano had erupted and poured a stream of lava
over the river fields where sago palms flourished.
This had caused losses, and the Senor, ever ready
to combat any hindrance or legitimate opposition,
came to Renor Brighten Airey, whom he knew
from past experience, and proposed to despatch a
flying fire engine, under his direction to the scene
of trouble and see what might be done to prevent
similar outbreaks recurring. Perhaps, suggested
the Senor, an outlet from the crater might be
blasted, allowing the lava to flow into a desolate
gorge on the opposite side of the volcano.
The calm and reasonable way in which he dis-
cussed the proposal appealed to Chih-hu, who, more-
over, was attracted by the charm and courtesy of
the Senor, whose manner, while being equal with
all, nevertheless suggested what they might do.
And Senor Tortue found the quiet and simple man-
ner of Chih as agreeable as the quick perception


which, he saw, underlay the serene mind.
An interview with Firefighter Silverdew speedily
reached satisfactory terms, and it was arranged
that an expedition would leave next morning, in
charge of Brighten Airey, with Chih-hu and a
chosen crew of four men on a powerful, flying fire-
boat to investigate the volcanic disturbance. Wu
Chih was to be cook, and with him went Pi Po,
the opossum, who could not be left behind, while
Chang remained at the fire station where he was
on the best of terms with the staff.
Early in the morning they left Celestion, and,
passing along the coast of Australia, followed the
Great Barrier Reef until between Olinda and Pan-
dora entrances, where a course was set along the
south-west coast of New Guinea and crossing the
Charles Louis Mountains and following the
northern coastline they arrived at the sago factory,
which stood at the mouth of the Yellow River—
which means, in Chinese, the next world—beside
the Cape of Good Hope. They had arrived along-
side the Equator at the centre of the East.
Here they learnt that the eruption had ceased,
and the volcano, Chang Pu-liang—which means a
man who does not measure, or a generous spirit
stood in sombre majesty. That night Chih-hu was
silent, and Brighten Airey laughingly said, “A man
who does not measure is superior to the next world,
and good hope alongside means victory.” But Chih
did not respond. He was deep in thought.
At daylight next morning the fire-boat rose from
the Yellow River to the top of Chang Pu-liang, and
revealed a crater with a rift in the side, and not a
sign of molten lava to be seen. On the other side,
opposite the river, the main flow of lava had been
c 33


blocked by an accumulation from a previous erup-
tion, and the last, which had destroyed the sago
palms on the river flats, might not recur.
“ It would be a waste of time to interfere with
the volcano,” said the master. “We had better be
off. There is no telling when the next outbreak
will occur.” But Chih-hu, who was peering through
a telescope into the crater, begged him to hold the
fire-boat immediately over the hole, which the
gyroscope made easily possible. And Brighten
Airey, though a little surprised, held the plane as
requested.
The sides of the crater were of precipitous rock,
descending into a hole which had no bottom, save
vapour at great depth, which floated up and down
with the regularity of an ocean swell. Chih
searched the sides round the crater with his tele-
scope, descending lower and lower into the dark-
ness.
“ There it is,” he cried, and his words were filled
with awe as he handed the glass to the master.
“What in the world do you see? ” exclaimed
Brighten Airey.
Yin-Yang,” calmly replied Chih-hu.
Through the telescope, Brighten Airey saw, on
a ledge of rock more than a thousand feet below
them, a small heap of what looked like greyish-
white dust.
“ is the force which makes the world go
round, said Chih, “ and if we collect some of it,
the value will be greater than the whole of New
Guinea.”
Brighten Airey looked at Chih-hu to see if he
was serious. He had never heard of Yin-Yang,
which to him sounded like a comic opera name.


But he saw that the other was in earnest, and he
knew that Chih possessed a far-seeing mind, his
name meaning Luminous Wisdom.
“ Well! ” he replied, “we cannot lower a man
to that depth in such a dark and treacherous hole.”
“No!” exclaimed the voice of Wu Chih, who
had come silently behind them, “ but Pi Po could
do it. He can see in the darkness.”
Chih-hu was quick to seize the opportunity, and
sent Wu to bring Pip, a bucket, and some sugar.
Placing the sugar on the deck, he told the opossum
to fill the bucket, which he did, blinking in the
strong light, and scooped up the remnants in his
little paws. Then tipping the sugar out, and
explaining to Pi Po that he wanted him to scoop
up the sugar-stuff down in the hole, a long rope
was tied to the bucket and Pi Po sat in it. They
lowered him until the bucket became almost invis-
ible in the crater, against the vapour below. And
Chih, watching through the telescope, directed
Brighten Airey to swing the bucket gently over
the ledge, and Pi Po landed safely. In the dim
light, Chih saw him filling the bucket, working
more and more slowly, and then nestling on top of
his load he seemed to fall asleep.
“ Pull quickly,” cried Chih, “ the ledge is bare.”
Swiftly the bucket was hauled, and as the master
lifted it over the side Pi Po lay on the top,
insensible. The fumes below had been too much for
him. Wu Chih picked him up and carried him aft,
where brandy restored consciousness and the opos-
sum fell fast asleep. His task was done.
The bucket was almost filled with a substance
which, even as they looked, became firmer and
settled into a compact lump as hard as rock. It


was remotely like grey-white jade, but of a denser
texture, and unlike any solid material which they
knew. Chih pasted a canvas cover over the bucket
and placed it in the hose box with hoses packed
around. His face was smiling as he said;
“ Our fortune is made.”
“ Then let us be off with it,” replied the master,
and the fire-boat turned south and flew for Celes-
tion. As they passed along the coast Brighten
Airey asked:
“ What is this soap-stone stuff of which you
think so highly? ”
And Chih-hu replied:
“ Examining into antiquity, it is revealed that
the highest in China begins with Fu-hsi, a monarch
who established the first lines of I Ching, or Book
of Changes, which is the third oldest book. Fu-hsi
saw a dragon-horse issue from the Ho, or Yellow
River, bearing on its back marks which he inter-
preted as a clear circle, meaning the Sun or Great
Brightness, which became an undivided line in the
I Ching, representing Yang, or male, and an obscure
circle, meaning the Moon, or Great Obscurity,
which became a divided line representing Yin, or
female, Yang was strong, or hard, hence authority,
while Yin was weak, or submissive, hence obedient.
“ These first lines were composed of eight groups
of divided and undivided lines, three in each group.
Centuries later, Wen Wang increased these lines to
sixty-four double groups, which represented powers
in Nature and were read as short essays in six lines.
Confucius is credited with the Ten Wings, which
are commentaries on the diagrams, and he regretted
being unable to give more time to the study of the


I Ching, which he called the most exquisite thing
under heaven.
“ In the Sung dynasty, Chu Hsi, the great philo-
sopher, began to study the I Ching while at school.
It became the source of the theory of the universe,
and Lien Hsi, another Sung philosopher, wrote the
‘ Diagram of the Supreme Ultimate,’ which is a
sane philosophy of the theory of the universe, based
on the I Ching diagrams. But Chu Hsi was the
most excellent of all. In his teaching, the key of
Chinese thought is law and love. At the centre is
Li, which is Law, or Heaven, and Yin and Yang,
the active and passive, or light and darkness, follow
each other in harmonious succession, Chu Hsi
taught that the eternal generation of Yin and Yang
is by Li, and so Law, or Heaven, is the Ultimate
or controlling principle in the universe. His theory
has remained unchanged for seven centuries, and is
the salt which has preserved China.
“ Nevertheless, no one knows what is meant by
the Book of Changes, which makes it still the most
fascinating work in existence. How the doctrine of
the Supreme Ultimate evolved from the I Ching is
a puzzle to Western students. The Sung school
supplied the system of the Universe in the diagram
of the Supreme Ultimate, in which were the two
modes, or Yang and Yin, male and female, active
and passive, strong and weak, rigid and tender,
heaven and earth. Yin produces Yang, and Yang
produces Yin in endless succession. And this has
been shown in decorative symbols all over the
place.
“ Since civilization began men have thought
about the universe. In the West, a heaven was
imagined beyond the earth. And in the East, Lao


Tzu and Confucius confined their thoughts to an
earthly heaven which always escaped them. Then
in the Sung dynasty a theory of the world was set
out in simple words. In the light of modern know-
ledge we know that the earth is a globe. But we
do not know what causes it to go round. Nor, in
all probability, did Chu Hsi know it was a globe,
although he could have told what force moved it.
“All life on this sorrowful globe, from the tiniest
insects, trees and grasses, to the most powerful
beings, which by force of brain is mankind, is
divided into male and female in ceaseless pursuit
of each other. The force which moves it is, in the
words of Chu Hsi, the Yin and the Yang, or male
and female. This philosopher showed all life as
pursuing in a circle, the male following female or
the female following male. It was the profoundest
movement in the world. But what he did not
show is the cause of it.
“ The earth is composed of a circular crust on
which life moves in accordance with the Yin and
the Yang, or in pursuit of each other. There is no
choice. The Yin-Yang determines the movement.
But there could be no movement unless the earth
revolved. Life would cease. And even as Yin-
Yang makes life on the crust, so it causes the earth
to go round. Somewhere in the bowels of the
earth, probably around the centre, within a nest
of molten substance, revolves the Yin and the Yang
in ceaseless pursuit of each other. This eternal
chase is the cause of the earth’s revolution.
“ Now, if a substance, which is not rigid and
hard, is spun around, it assumes the widest circle
at the greatest circumference and least when fur-
thest from it. Consequently, the Yin-Yang


approaches nearest the surface of the earth at the
Equator, which is the greatest circumference. And
as fragments are cast off in the ceaseless revolu-
tions, they may be thrown up towards the crust
by the action of volcanic disturbances. Approach-
ing the surface, its incandescent state becomes more
solid, and the Yin-Yang, which we have secured,
is capable of being converted back to a fluid state
by the application of heat, when it must revolve,
the Yin being pursued by the Yang with a force
which will increase as heat is applied. And this
force is the most powerful in the world.
Perhaps from the centre of the earth where a
vacuum must occur, in the revolving Yin-Yang, the
Supreme Ultimate may direct the movements of
the world. Lao Tzu, the Taoist sage of the fifth
century 8.C., held that the world evolved from an
unnameable absolute being without personal will.
He may be right.”
Without mishap the fire-boat arrived safely at
her anchorage in Celestion, where Brighten Airey
and Chih-hu, carrying the bucket carefully, went
at once to Senor Tortue, who dwelt in a house
opposite the Political Circle, while Wu Chih car-
ried Pi Po to his box.


CHAPTER FIVE
IN WHICH THE “ YIN-YANG ” IS BUILT AND SPACE
IS THREATENED.
SENOR TORTUE received them in his office,
which was decorated with maps of all lands,
and dating to the earlier creative periods in the
world. On the wall opposite to his seat, before a
lacquered bureau of English make in the Chinese
style of decoration, were hung two world-maps of
Ming date which, at glance, led his thoughts to
lands where trade was possible with the Celestian
wares which he controlled.
Listening with interest to Brighten Airey's
account of their trip, and conclusions about the
volcano, Senor Tortue’s eyes flitted between the
bucket and Chih-hu, who sat beside it, until his
curiosity could not be restrained.
“And what have you brought in the bucket? ” he
said to Chih-hu, who replied:
“A force which will drive an aeroplane round the
world without cost for the power consumed.”
Senor Tortue sat back in his chair and whistled.
“ That would be a miracle,” he said, “ and the
problem of supplying petrol would be settled. The
wells are running dry and no alternative spirit
seems of much use. But tell me about this force
which you have in the bucket.”
When Chih-hu had told the tale of their location
and recovery of the Yin-Yang, and of its power,
the Senor said:
“ Miracles are commonly regarded as the work
of supernatural beings. They are nothing more
than flights of the imagination. There is no such


thing as a miracle, which is not absurd, beyond the
possibility of accomplishment. In execution they
are unusual actions, just as madness is unusual
thought. The most marvellous are those which
deal with the subjugation of time and space.
Science, in its actions, is overtaking imagina-
tion in the realm of space. It is
com-
paratively short while since space was traversed,
in the most daring imaginations, on a magic
carpet, which is a figment beside a modern
flying machine. An era is approaching when space
will no longer offer a field for miracles of flight.
When time is similarly placed there will be very
little room for the miraculous.
“ The workings of miracles are rare, singular and
distinguished. If they were like our hallucinations,
habitual and commonplace, they would not be
recognised. We have yet to discover what the
world is. We have yet to establish that invisible
beings exist. There is nothing absurd in assuming
that they do exist reason does not accept the
thought that they cannot. Because we are not able
to comprehend it, there is nothing to show that
life, in all its forms, cannot be revealed by our
senses. To manifest itself to our senses, life must
be given certain conditions of temperature. It is
not impossible that it exists in a gaseous state with
no less energy than in a solid state. And the suns,
which appear as beneficent orbs at the centre of
every system in the universe, may not be an abode
of eternal silence, doomed to everlasting sterility.
While the earth itself may have within its bosom
the life source of all its fecundity. Nothing prevents
the existence of children at the earth’s centre, just


as there are children in its waters, and sons of its
soil.
“This Yin-Yang which you have in the bucket
is the motive force of the universe. It is life, which
is love. And as W. S. Gilbert said in a song: * It’s
love that makes the world go round,’ Far from
being in disagreement with science, it seems to
base itself upon it. It is a mysterious essence.
There are spirits who dwell naturally on the mys-
terious confines of Nature.
“According to your views, Yin and Yang, at the
centre of the earth, are in eternal pursuit of each
other, in a gaseous state, thus causing the revolu-
tion of the globe. This does not agree with new
evidence that the centre of the earth is hard and
rigid, which was presented by James B, Macelwane,
of the University of California, at a meeting of the
American Physical Society. By studying records
of the South Pacific earthquake on June 20th, 1924,
Mr. Macelwane sought to prove that the centre of
the earth is solid, a view which has been advanced
by German scientists, and accepted by some geo-
logists, but which is generally denied.
“ However, I agree with you. Your discovery of
Yin-Yang deep in the crater of a volcano leaves no
room for doubt about the centre of the earth being
in a gaseous state. One has less chance of being
entirely wrong in one’s beliefs if one believes things
which seem impossible. There are few things of
which we can be certain. And there are times when
reality becomes wearisome, and when one would
like to fly off into a world where everything is not
regulated by the laws of Nature, This is impossible,
but we desire it none the less. Our unreasonable
desires are dearest to us and our unreasonable


actions usually turn out our best. What we know
is nothing beside what we do not know. What we
do is a trifle beside that which is undone. We see
everything reflected in ourselves, and it proves
monotonous and dull. So we yearn for the
miraculous, and failing that, grasp at novelty. It
is sad when it is impossible to be deceived any
longer, because there is no happiness without
illusion.
“ The inclination for the marvellous is innate in
all men, and a special taste for impossibilities is in
all of us. That is why we like to explore tracts of
the imagination. And to do this we must ask the
way to the unknown world of novelists and poets,
not of magicians and spirits.”
SenorTortue rose and pulled off the canvas on
the bucket. Turning to Chih-hu, he said:
“ I have the very man to make an aeroplane
propelled by your Yin-Yang. Renor Goodspeed is
an excellent engineer, and he is not afraid to tackle
supernatural problems. When the plane has been
made we must foregather and decide what we shall
do with it.”
As Brighten Airey and Chih-hu reached the open
air, the master looked at Chih, wiped his brow, and
said:
“ Phew! ”
And Chih-hu replied:
The Hall of Untroubled Thought ’ produced
superior writing paper and would, perhaps, have
run short if required to supply all Celestion.”
Eight months passed swiftly, during which
Chih-hu attended to his duties and devoted spare
time to learning geography, and of the races in the


world and their languages. His memory was infal-
lible. He had inherited the Chinese ability to
remember, which was developed through centuries
of memorising written characters, and when he
chose, a book read was registered in his mind.
At the end of this time, a message came from
Senor Tortue requesting him to call at the office,
when they could proceed to inspect the aeroplane
which had been completed. He found the Senor
pointing out the accuracy of Ptolomy’s Map of the
World, made in the second century, a copy of which
hung on the wall, and Brighten Airey listening with
respect. Proposing that they should go in his car
and see the result of Goodspeed’s enthusiasm, the
party proceeded westwards until they came to Cam
Hill, which had been the dwelling place of an
alchemist, in the days before flying, and perhaps
his spirit still haunts the spot where on a slope
beside an aqueduct stood a workshop.
Renor Goodspeed welcomed them and, sliding
back the huge doors, revealed the plane. It was
an attractive sight. The long, low body was painted
azure-blue and streamlined with gold. At the bow,
which, although knife-edged, projected like the
breast of a swan when swimming in calm water,
rose a bowsprit fashioned like the neck and head
of a phoenix with a vermilion bill resting on its
breast, and with eyes which were fitted with power-
ful searchlights. Beside the bow, on the breast
of the swan, were two port-holes from which the
course could be watched when landing. And be-
hind these, at the spot where a swan’s wings are
placed, were port and starboard propellers. Mid-
way along the body were wings, sweeping upwards
and outwards and dipping in curves at the ends,


and hinged at the body to fold when the plane was
stationary and required to be housed. Astern the
hull rose slightly into a rudder shaped like the tail
of a swan in flight, and sheltering a porthole from
which the course was observable when going astern.
Underneath were placed a second pair of propellers
to assist the speed and keep an even keel when the
wind was rough. The body, rising like the hull of
a ship or a swan in flight, curved inwards, upwards,
and outwards again, sheltering under the projection
a row of portholes rimmed with gold and interset
between curved doors which opened from the deck
within. Over the portholes the projecting curve
swept across the slightly barrelled top along which
were three gyroscopic lifting propellers placed at
equidistances of the length. Along each side of
the level keel was a caterpillar tractor with
reversible cogs that could be used for propulsion
on land or in water. And under the tail propellers
were curved vermilion doors which on opening
lowered a few steps which gave entrance to the
plane. At the bow was inscribed in gold the name
" Yin-Yang,” and under the tail the port of regis-
tration, “ Celestion.”
As he looked at the plane, Chih-hu said that with
it phoenix head and azure-blue, it looked ready to
traverse the skies and fly to the sun.
Goodspeed was impatient to show the interior
and the power, and led the way through the ver-
milion doors up a companionway to the main deck,
where were grouped eight tiny cabins with a saloon
and kitchen attached. The upper deck was arranged
as a lounge with the three shafts of the lifting
propellers cased in and looking like three great
masts. The hold was fitted to receive goods, and


a space provided for stores with ice room, oil, and
spare parts. The engine-room was forward on the
main deck, and here Goodspeed became enthu-
siastic.
“ Yin-Yang,” he said, “ generates stupendous
force. It is always in a state of attraction, and
when separated by scientific means, exhibits a
powerful reaction. When brought together at a
certain temperature, it vanishes spontaneously with
a slight explosion. It bursts, and nothing remains
but a drop of liquid which contains a few anthropo-
morphic animalcules whose birth preceded the rest
of living creatures. Its efforts to unite work the
cylinders of the plane, producing immense speed,
for it is a true life-force which is a live force and
makes the world go round.
“The solid Yin-Yang, when under a high
temperature, explodes into a gas. This gas is not
lost, but is passed through a series of water-cooling
screens which reduces its activity, and in an
inactive state is separated into the Yin and the
Yang, or male and female forms, by means of
reflectors which attract the Yang, or male gas, into
compartments, but not the Yin, or female, which is
passive.
“ Being separated, the Yin and the Yang are then
heated, and the greater the heat the greater is their
effort to join. To gain speed, a series of ovens are
heated by electricity. These ovens are tiny because
the amount of Yin-Yang required is very small.
There are forty-five of them placed along the pro-
peller shafts, where, as Chih-hu remarked, they are
like the fire on the tail of a firefly. The power
developed by the Yin and the Yang in trying to
unite is passed to the propeller shaft, which


revolves faster and faster as more and more ovens
are turned on from these switches which you see
in the engineer s table. There is a certain loss of
power in the process. The Yin-Yang grows tired,
even as steel rails grow tired, and all life grows
tired in fruitless pursuit. It has to be reconverted
to a solid state every now and then, when it partly
recovers energy. But it is never quite the same,
and the stock will have to be replenished sooner or
later. Nevertheless, a very small quantity is suf-
ficient to drive this plane round the world at its
greatest diameter, which is the Equator.
The earth revolves once in twenty-four hours,
and the amount of Yin-Yang in this plane should
drive an average load around the earth at the
Equator, a distance of twenty-four thousand
miles, in a little over twenty-four hours, the
difference being due to the load and a slight
leakage. If the plane proceeded from east to west,
against the sun, the difference would be greater.
To gain power, the process used of ovens, con-
taining Yin-Yang, revolving on the propeller, is
the same as at the axis of the world applied to a
propeller shaft. And the propeller shaft, or axis
of the world, according to Chu Hsi, is the Supreme
Ultimate, the source of all things.”
Returning to Celestion, Senor Tortue said:
My confidence in the ‘ Yin-Yang ’is unbounded,
and I would like to take a trip around the world
m , en Business interests, however, prevent such
a p easure; but there is no reason why such a flight
should not be made and treated as a financial ven-
ure. Let us then compose a crew and the flight
ma y e commenced as soon as they are ready.”


After consultation in his office, and recommenda-
tions by Chih-hu of four members of his fire-plane
crew, whom he described as Four H. Renors of
exceptional hardness and efficiency, t e enor
aereed to the following appointments Master,
Brighten Airey; Engineer, Goodspeed; Crew
Assistants, Honeybunn, Heavis.de, Hurry Fifty,
and Hornblower; Cook, Wu Chih; Comprador,
Chih-hu. . \r„__ »»»
“ The Eight Immortals of the Yin-Yang,
laughingly said Senor Tortue.
“Requiring only Chang Li Heng, the elephant,
and Pi Po, the opossum, to make complete ar-
mony,” added Chih.
“Of course,” said the Senor, “ and now proceed
with the training and make a start.
At the end of a week all hands had mastered their
working and handling of the plane, and as efficient
airmen, with stores loaded and wireless telephone
installed, were ready to embark on the Ym-Yang
for a flight around the world.


CHAPTER SIX
WHEREIN ADVENTURES BEGIN WITH “ SANDAL-
WOOD SMUGGLERS,” AND BIRDS, BEING UN-
AWARE OF MAN IN THE AIR, NEARLY CAUSE
DISASTER.
EARLY in the morning, while frost still lay on
the grass, the “Yin-Yang” rose into the air on
a flight around the world. Straight up she went
to a thousand feet, her engines making a soft hum,
soothing sleeping Celestians, Through the western
gates of the city, market carts passed in single file,
laden with icy ripe oranges, ready for breakfast.
Here and there an early passenger plane bringing
workers from the mountain range, which rose pale
blue in the clear morning light, dropped swiftly to
its ’drome. Out at sea, a schooner waited for the
morning breeze like a white petal floating in a
world of blue. And the azure-blue roofs of Celes-
tion, tipped with the first rays of the sun, seemed
as much of a heaven below as the empyrean above.
Brighten Airey was at the wheel, and, flying at a
leisurely pace, headed north north-west and the
city dropped out of sight as Wu Chih struck the
gong for breakfast. When Chih-hu came on deck
from a repast of omelette and fruits, they were
passing over the line of octrois, which marked the
boundary of Celestians’ abode. The day was per-
fect, and as Chih watched Honeybunn giving
Chang an armful of sweet meadow hay in his stall
at the end of the deck, with Pi Po sound asleep in
his box overhead, he would have welcomed a world
of the circumference in the past. But the tinkle
of the telephone bell, and Wu Chih calling him,
D 49


sent the Comprador to the receiver, where Senor
Tortue said:
“Good morning!”
And being assured that all was as pleasant and
agreeable as “old spring time,” continued:
“A message this morning from the Sandalwood
Supply Company, of which the Managing Director
reports that sandalwood is being removed from
Gulf of Carpentaria ports by an unknown ship.
The last loss reported was from Karumba, at the
south of the Gulf, and an unknown vessel had been
seen on the south-west coast. Therefore, proceed
without delay along the south-western shore,
bearing north, and report any signs of a vessel
engaged in poaching sandalwood.”
Chih gave the instructions to the Master and the
“Yin-Yang” proceeded at a faster pace. Mean-
while, Brighten Airey handed the wheel to Heavi-
side and joined Chih on the deck and remarked:
“ Of late a revival of Buddhism has occurred
throughout the East and has spread to Celestion,
with a consequent shortage of sandalwood for
burning as incense. Sandalwood has risen in price
and the Company is collecting the wood as fast as
possible. It is cut and stacked along the coast of
the Gulf, at the mouth of rivers, by coolies who
work for the Company. The wood is cut into
lengths of three feet six inches and about three
inches diameter, and shipped to factories where it
is ground into a powder which is burnt in temples
and gives a pleasant perfume. In Celestion an oil
is also extracted and used medicinally.”
Goodspeed joined them and looked with pride at
the country flitting past. Mountains, hills, plains,
occasional rivers, and sometimes a town, appeared


for a moment and vanished as the “ Yin-Yang ”
sped over them.
“ She is only sauntering,” he said
Nevertheless, the waters of the Gulf speedily
came into view.
“ Twelve hundred miles in two hours,” said
Goodspeed, looking at the clock on the main mast,
“ is nothing to what she can do.”
But Chih, seeing Karumba spread below them,
looked at the Master, who turned north-west. For
half-an-hour they sped along the coast without a
sign of anything unusual, villages on the banks of
streams slumbering in the heat, and then Boora-
loola attracted their attention. The inhabitants
were spread around, many in the blazing sunlight,
lying as though dead.
“ Let us descend,” said Chih, as they all looked
overboard.
Honeybunn declared that plague had decimated
the town and serpents were around the bodies. But
Hurry Fifty added that the snakes had a stiffish
look and might be caught.
“ Drunk as jelly-fish,” said the Master as the
Yin-Yang” landed on the space by the wharf,
where the inhabitants, with stomachs extended, lay
fast asleep. All around bamboo bottles littered the
ground, and Hurry Fifty found an unopened one by
the side of an important person under an umbrella.
He held up the bottle and read: “ Celebes Gin and
Ginger Beer, Manufactured by the Fu-hai Com-
pany at Timbuku.”
“ Fu-hai is an excellent name,” said Chih. “It
means ‘Happy Liquid.’ ”
“And Holland gin and ginger beer is a splendid


drink in hot weather,” remarked Brighten Airey.
“ We must have some.”
A glance at the wharf, where a few pieces of
broken sandalwood were scattered about, told the
tale.
Leaving Booraloola to sleep off its debauch, they
proceeded in a northerly direction, and the Master
remarked that the gin ship could not be far ahead.
Soon, Groote Eylandt appeared and they entered
over Blue Mud Bay at the mouth of Weak-water
River.
“And here we are.”
People were gathered round the wharf on the
river with more bottles from the Fu-hai Company.
Stacks of sandalwood lined the wharf and a few
were broken down. But not a sign of ship or
stranger could be seen.
“ That is strange,” said Brighten Airey, “We
had better land and make enquiries.”
As the “ Yin-Yang ” proceeded slowly over the
river, Chang, who was watching through the open
gangway beside Wu Chih, caught sight of an island
covered with white-dew bushes. He was partial
to white-dew berries, and pulled Wu’s arm and
waved his trunk at the island. As Wu looked he
was amazed to see the foliage drifting with the
tide.
“ So there they are! ” said the Master, when Wu
reported the floating island, and he brought the
“Yin-Yang” over the stern.
Signalling to stop the ship, Brighten Airey, at
the same time, rose in the air to be out of danger
should it arise. But branches of white-dew berry
were heaved overboard and a junk appeared fitted
with motor engines. The Captain, who was a


Malay, waved his hand and laughed. Thereupon
the junk began to move slowly towards the open
Chih-hu watched with concern. It was his first
experience as Comprador, and to fail would be to
lose face. Quickly telling Wu Chih to bring up
a case of chicken-in-aspec, and the bottle from
Booraloola, he asked the Master to hold their
position over the stern. Honeybunn and Hurry
Fifty opened the tins while Chih poured gin and
ginger beer over the chicken.
“It is a pity to waste it,” remarked Hurry,
watching the rapidly emptying bottle. “ I feel as
hollow as the heart of a chicken at the sight.”
“A good cook does not count the grains for a
rice pudding, replied Chih, and began throwing
pieces of his dish around the stem of the junk and
towards the mud banks on either side of her.
Then the mud banks began to move as hundreds
of crocodiles scented the gin and chicken-in-aspec.
And the water around the stern of the junk became
a mass of them. Carefully, Chih emptied tin after
tin close to the rudder, and the water became ruddy
as the propeller cut the hungry reptiles.
“ Crocodiles do not pause to think,” said Chih,
and threw over the remaining tins of chicken-in-
aspec. A huge crocodile opened his jaws and
received a tin even as his struggling companions
pushed his body against the whirling blades in the
turmoil. The propeller fouled his slimy length and
jammed, while in the confusion which followed the
rudder was broken. Swiftly the junk was swept
round by the tide and imbedded in the blue mud.
Its voyage was ended.
As the “Yin-Yang” proceeded north, Chih-hu


went below and called Senor Tortue on the tele-
phone. He was gratified to report a first success,
and attributed it to the gin and ginger beer, which,
he declared, had proved too tasty for the crocodiles.
The Senor remarked that forty-two tins of chicken-
in-aspec would be charged in the account to the
Sandalwood Company, whom he would notify about
the position of the junk, which would be placed
under arrest, and a shipment of Fu-hai gin and
ginger beer would be welcomed in Celestion when
the days were hot and thirsty, and he complimented
the Comprador on his “ Five Constant Virtues.”
Cruising along over Torres Strait, the tempera-
ture being very warm and tropical, Wu Chih pro-
posed to serve lunch on deck. As he arranged a
table, a small island appeared ahead, and over it a
dark cloud.
“ That is curious,” said Brighten Airey, “ with
blue sky everywhere around. It must be smoke.
But the island is a rock, and a solid one, too.”
As they drew nearer and Wu set the table, Chang
came along and received a mouthful of sardines to
taste. Finding the fish not to his liking, he removed
it with his trunk and, stepping to the open gangway,
blew it overboard. Immediately the dark cloud
approached, and in an instant the “ Yin-Yang ” was
in the midst of millions of sea-birds. They circled
about the plane and flew perilously near the pro-
pellers, Goodspeed not daring to increase the speed,
and disaster threatened.
Wu Chih was standing with a dish of sardines in
his hand when a small gull made a quick dash at it.
Instantly he grasped the situation and threw over-
board the sardines he held, and grabbing the plates
on the table the rest followed. Whereupon the


cloud of birds descended in chase of the sardines
and the “ Yin-Yang ” flew clear.
“ That was a close shave,” said Goodspeed, as
they passed over the rock, which is called Bird
Island.


CHAPTER SEVEN
WHICH CONTAINS A TALE OF SEASONED SWAN
AND OF BIRDS WHICH LEAD MANKIND.
SSING the Arafura Sea, the “Yin-Yang”
L flew over Damma in the Serwatty Islands, in
the South Banda Sea, where the day was very hot.
All hands, excepting those on duty, lounged on the
deck beside the open doors, where Goodspeed was
loquacious on the subject of birds.
“ Man,” he declared, “ has followed birds through
all ages, and his flying machines owe their inven-
tion to watching birds’ flights. Moreover, all his
arts owe much to the lead of feathered beings. In
the use of gay clothes, he imitated their plumage;
in the building of his home, he followed the art of
their nests; and in the music of his song he listened
to their joyful notes. And he followed where they
led.
“ The ignorance which still cloaks man in
stupidity makes him unaware of his debt. And as
a sign of his inferiority he slays his benefactors,
and nowhere with more callousness than in the
killing of swans.”
“Do you mean to say,” said Brighten Airey,
“ that man killed swans? ”
“Yes!” replied Goodspeed. “It was not so
long ago that he shot them for the fun of killing,
all unconscious of his debt to birds.
“ Years ago there was a village called Swansea,
on the remote east coast of an island to the south-
ward of Celestion, where in the month of January
it was the custom to feast on seasoned swan.
Perhaps it was the dish that gave the name to the


village, although, more likely, it was called after
Swansea on the Bristol Channel, by a pioneer who
came from Wales.
“ Entering the village, the inns, the shops, and
well-nigh every dwelling, bore on boards or calico
the sign ‘ Seasoned Swan.’ The season for shooting
swans was at its height. Parties were arranged
daily for the slaughter at a lagoon nearby, with a
narrow channel leading to the sea. Here amongst
the reeds, swans reared their broods as they had
done for ages, and when the time came for the
young to depart the shooting commenced. Beaters
drove the birds from the head of the lagoon to the
channel, where the sportsmen were hidden amongst
tall reeds. As the swans flew overhead, hundreds
fell, and ‘ seasoned swan ’ became the common dish.
“ Every table was graced with a roasted cob or
pen, which, though it had been black, was brother
to the beloved of Leda. A delicious odour from
the burnt skin and flesh aroused curiosity about
the flavour, yet repugnance came at the thought of
eating the bird which had graced many a pool
where lotus flourished.
“ Sailing gracefully amongst lilies and lotus to
take from outstretched hands bread or biscuits,
with trustfulness of our species, the sight of bread
crumbs mingled with raisins, thyme and sage, in
the stuffing of the bird on the dish, was too much
like the bread on the waters returning to hand.
To plead that this was a wild swan could not over-
come remorse. The bird on the dish had lived free
as the air, akin with nature. Never in its life,
which was short, so easily did the flesh slice under
the carver’s hand, had its wings come nearer man
than on high flights in the darkness of night over


sleeping towns, until the day when, flying fast over
the channel to the sea, waiting guns destroyed it.
No mark or seal of ownership ever was placed on
its dark feathers or vermilion bill, such as are on
its white brethren by the banks of the Thames
during the ceremony of marking the King’s swans.
Its whistling call, passing overhead in the dark-
ness of a summer’s night, led one to wonder where
the lagoon to which it would descend before the
dawn. Sometimes it came from the shaded bank
of a garden pool, no beggar but proud with the
poise of monarch of still water. And the arrogant
look in its eye as with slightly tilted head it sur-
veyed what dainties were floating. The hue of its
feathers, dull black faintly pencilled in grey, with
a touch of white on the pinions, was a foil to the
bill of dull vermilion. And what a fierce antag-
onist at the time of mating, dealing a rival hard
blows with wings of iron despite their covering of
feathers.
“ Black swans grace London gardens, foreigners in
a strange, cold land. With broods, hybrid lots, pie-
bald, black or white, was it loneliness that caused
the mating with a white bird, lovely, but not so
attractive as the dusky hue and vermilion bill? Or
was it loveliness in a snow-white mate which lured
to the mating? There is in the species a love which
Leda found irresistible. She loved a swan. Tradi-
tion has not yet found a place for the black and
vermilion bird which swims on the postage stamps
of Western Australia. Perhaps, some day, a legend
may arise and the black swan achieve its Leda.
Jupiter still watches, and may appear when the
world becomes intelligent again.
“ There was a woman who dwelt by a lagoon


on the coast northwards of Celestion. She formed
a friendship with a black swan which rarely left
the neighbourhood. This woman gave birth to
twins, one of whom became a great swimmer, and
the other a noted ornithologist. The father of the
boys never appeared, and he may have been Jupiter
fallen from his celestial abode, since all men have
become of one class and the gods no longer receive
attention.
“ When Leda loved her swan, the gods were at
one with the people. Jupiter and Venus strolling
the banks of the River Eurotas came upon Leda
bathing. The daughter of King Thespius was mar-
ried to the King of Sparta and was a few days
advanced in her pregnancy. Jupiter was enrap-
tured with her beauty. He requested Venus to
take the form of an eagle while he became a swan.
This request to a goddess may seem strange to a
modern mind, but these little adventures were not
amiss in the golden days.
“After the metamorphosis, Jupiter, apparently
afraid of the bird of prey, rushed into the arms of
Leda, who willingly sheltered the trembling swan.
Her caresses were reciprocated, which enabled
Jupiter to avail himself of his situation.
“ The knowing bird, all-wise and all-seeing, as
becomes a god, guessed the consequences to follow,
if he did not actually know, and, resuming his god-
self before leaving, out of a kindly feeling said to
Leda:
“ ‘ It would be as well, Madam, while you are at
the seaside this season, to partake freely of the
succulent bivalves which are to be found attached
to the rocks by the shore. Their flavour is deli-
cious, but I would recommend also a little of the


shell dissolved in wine. The lime thus obtained
will prove useful to your system during the next
nine months.’ Jupiter anticipated the birth to come
in offering this advice, knowing that to form a
shell to contain his child—or children, as it proved
—would require a good deal more lime than is
usually needed.
“ Following this advice, Leda, at the seaside,
soon developed a liking for oysters, which have
become the food of lovers. Perhaps she took too
many, her passion for oysters becoming so great
that she absorbed lime enough to cover Jupiter’s
children and her husband’s as well, which was
probably more than Jupiter intended. Or perhaps
she nibbled the oyster shells with an appetite of a
swan, who, like most fowl, have a liking for shell.
At any rate, Pollux and Helena, Jupiter’s children,
and Castor and Clytemnestra were fully formed
when the shells were broken and they were liber-
ated in as lusty a frame as in the usual birth. Thus
mankind learnt to eat oysters.”
“ You are right, Renor Goodspeed,” said Chih.
“ Mankind is unaware of his debt to birds. Indeed,
he became so divorced from Nature that he
imagined his sciences were superior, until the great
awakening.
“ In Asiatic lands mythology deals with geese,
the swan being unknown. The Queen of Buddhist
legend loved a gander, and in China the goose has
ever been a lover’s bird. The goose family is united
in legendary tales with human love. There is a
cave at Ajanta, in India, where a fresco illustrates
a sixth century Jataka, or story of the previous
incarnations of Buddha. This birth-tale relates how
Queen Khema dreamt about a golden goose and,


on awakening, persuaded Samayama, the King, to
find one for her. The Royal Fowler, instructed to
fulfil his task, captured the Goose-King, who was
deserted by all his subjects except Sumukha, his
devoted attendant. Brought before King Sama-
yama, they were received with honour and the
Goose-King spoke of the Law. Whereupon he was
requested to visit the Queen and given permission
to return to the slopes of Chittrakuta, the bright
peak. In reality, the Fowler was Chauna, Queen
Khema was the nun Khema, the King was Sari-
putta, and his retinue the followers of Buddha.
Sumukha was Anandra and the Goose-King was
Buddha himself. In the fresco the two geese are
enthroned at the centre with the group gathered
round listening intently to the tale of the Law.
“ In China, the goose from most ancient days
took a part in marriage ceremonies, and this prob-
ably suggested its use in the symbolism of the Ten
Wings, ascribed to Confucius, which were commen-
taries on the I Ching, or Book of Changes, whose
meaning remains hidden. Being a bird of passage,
flying in processional order, the goose suited inter-
pretations of the hexagrams.
“ Geese were believed never to mate a second
time, and so a libation to them is part of a marriage
ceremony, made when the bridegroom brings the
bride from her father s house. A goose was sent
as a gift with a proposal of marriage, and was
taken by the young man to the woman’s ancestral
temple.”
“And,” said Honeybunn, “ at my home in Celes-
tion, a duck lays an egg under a rose bush and
comes to the door every morning, where it quacks
until the egg is collected.”


“ Perhaps that is a sign of increasing interest in
us, on the part of birds,” said Goodspeed; and
most of the party fell asleep.


CHAPTER EIGHT
WHEREIN THE FIVE-CLAWED DRAGON, CHINA’S
OLDEST SYMBOL OF WATER, IS FOUND IN
CELEBES SEA, AND ORANG-OUTANGS IN BORNEO
DISPLAY MUSICAL TASTE.
THE weather continued very hot as they crossed
the Banda and the Molucca Seas. Passing the
Equator at Tomini Gulf, in Celebes, all were feeling
the heat except Chang Li Heng, who, being an ele-
phant, enjoyed it. As they crossed the northern
arm of the island and flew over Celebes Sea,
Chih-hu and Wu Chih began to show a gleam in
their eyes at the thought of nearing China. Wu
Chih went forward and peered ahead through the
heat haze, expecting China to appear shortly.
Meanwhile, the others were dozing and dreaming
when Wu called:
“ Ship ahead ! ”
As the “ Yin-Yang ” approached, the telephone
bell rang and Chih-hu attended. The call was from
the “Abounding Wealth,” a large modern junk,
electrically driven. On board was an American
scientific expedition under Handle P. Winder, the
Chief Observer. The purpose of the expedition was
to solve the problem of the dragon which scientists
had supposed to be discovered when a pair of
enormous lizard-like creatures were found in Timor
and taken to the London Zoological Gardens, be-
fore the downfall. These creatures had been dis-
covered by Sir Alan Cobham when flying to Aus-
tralia, and were accepted as dragons and no fur-
ther interest taken in the species. Patient research
had convinced Professor Winder that the lizards


were not dragons, and that the “ God of Water ”
would be found in its element. An expedition left
the United States and had chartered a junk at
Manila, in the Philippine Islands, and was engaged
in the search. Telescopic apparatus with powerful
lenses which could be lowered to great depths, was
proving inadequate owing to the slight oscillation
of the junk in the calm sea, and prevented clear
sight of the ocean floor. After searching for seven
weeks they had discovered, through the lenses,
something alive which could not be placed, and
fearing to lose touch, would esteem it an honour
if the flying vessel would descend and take aboard
the Professor and his telescope to investigate from
the steadier air.
Chih replied that it was an honourable under-
taking in which the eminent Professor was engaged,
and the inadequate “ Yin-Yang ” could descend in
his service for the paltry sum of one thousand
dollars. This amount, in the opinion of Professor
Winder, was exceedingly modest, and he blushed
at the idea of offering such a sum, but as no journey
was desired, and only a height to clear the water,
perhaps eight hundred would be acceptable for
half-an-hour’s inconvenience in the illustrious
voyage which they were taking. Considering that
the interests of heaven-famed science would be
served by the insignificant “ Yin-Yang,” Chih was
pleased to agree, and the plane descended and they
made fast to the “Abounding Wealth.”
Professor Handle P. Winder came on board and
his telescopic apparatus, which was attached to the
side of the junk, was made fast to the plane, which
cast off and, on the Professor’s instructions, rose
about twenty feet in the air while the “Abounding


Wealth” went ahead to remove her shadow.
Speedily the telescope was run out by a revolving
crank and descended to its limit, which was of
considerable depth. A ring of radio lights, affixed
to the lower end, lit the vicinity and powerful lenses
enabled close inspection. The Professor, with an
eye glued to the telescope, which was now sta-
tionary, became excited.
“ It is the dragon,” he exclaimed, and, stepping
aside, motioned Chih to take a look.
“ Moreover, it is the Imperial Dragon,” said
Chih, who knew intimately the Dragon Screen in
Peiping.
All were gathered round and, on looking,
expressed the conviction that it was the true
dragon.
At the bottom of the sea, perhaps thirty feet
beyond the radio lights, in a sandy circle, amongst
queer-shaped rocks, a large reptilian creature
rocked its head from side to side with the same
swelling motion of rolling waves. The body was
long and sinuous, with a razor-backed spine sup-
porting latch-hooks, similar to those found on
Eastern rugs, and covered with isosceles triangle
scales, and the tail was foliated at the end. Divid-
ing the total length into approximately three equal
parts were two pairs of strong, short legs, each leg
ending in five claws. At the crest of the neck rose
a comb, similar in shape to the cresting of a cock,
and ending in a knob at the head, with waving ten-
tacles. The eyes were protected by stiff, fibrous
eyebrows, and at the end of a long nose were three
protruding nostrils, one on each side and the third
in the centre, with waving latch-hooks attached.
The sand around was strewn with pearl-oyster
e 65


shells, suggesting this food, and the dragon, rolling
his head, was playing with a round black ball which
Hurry Fifty declared was a black pearl. Professor
Winder said that the dragon, if taken alive, would
add to the interest of the New York Zoo, or, if
dead, would enhance the collection of the Field
Museum in Chicago. But Chih was silent.
Appealing to Goodspeed, the Professor asked if
he could suggest how the dragon might be cap-
tured alive. The Engineer replied that could be
done, but he doubted if suitable food could be pro-
vided. However, he agreed to help, and went be-
low, returning with a jar of chloroform which was
kept in reserve to reduce the actions of the Yin-
Yang in the event of an accident.
“ This will quieten him,” he said, “ but the body
may not rise quickly,”
That, said the Professor, “is easily adjusted,”
and, going to the telephone, called the Captain of
the “Abounding Wealth ’’asking him to pass along
three cylinders of oxygen brought for the purpose
of administering to deep-sea divers in case of need.
Goodspeed lowered chloroform in a bottle with
an extra line attached to the stopper, which was
removed when seen through the telescope to be
close to the dragon’s head. Then slowly the wave-
like motion subsided and the dragon lay still. He
was under the anaesthetic. Quickly Goodspeed
lowered a drum of oxygen, with a plug that was
pulled out by a line, and the lower water was
aerated. The dragon heaved a deep breath and
began to rise. Drums of oxygen were lowered and
opened as he moved upwards, and the telescope
was drawn in ahead of him. All were intent and


a little alarmed. The Master whispered to Good-
speed to raise the plane a little so as to be clear
of danger. And then the dragon came to the sur-
face, where it lay like a log floating on the water.
The Imperial Dragon, for such it was, had an
intelligent head with almond-shaped eyes of bril-
liant yellow iris and pupils like black pearls. Its
nostrils were the colour of Chinese vermilion, and
the long tentacles were of heavenly blue, while the
body was covered with blue scales. The five-clawed
feet were of a golden colour, and each appeared to
be grasping a small black ball.
Thus the dragon lay for a few moments, and then
the air cleared away the effects of the chloroform.
Its head reared and a spurt of sea water was ejected
from its mouth, followed by a strong spray of
heaven-blue from the central nostril. Without
pause a quantity of green fluid emerged from the
left nostril, then a rose colour from the right, a
milky white from the left again, and a larger
amount of purple from the centre. The head sank
down, the body bulged, scales were expanded, and
the dragon’s eyes protruded. For a moment it
writhed, puffed up, and exploded like a toad-fish
rolled on the sand. The air had proved too light
to sustain it.
Falling fragments pattered on the roof and a
claw lodged on the starboard bow, which Hurry
Fifty recovered and handed to the Professor.
Inside the claw a large black pearl was lodged,
which he presented to Hurry, and turning to Chih,
requested him to take the claw and place it in the
Monastery of the Blue Dragon on the Mountain of
Dragons’ Brightness in China. Then Chih smiled


again, and when the Professor drew out his wallet
to settle the bill, he said:
“In the second century Ch’ao T’so remarked:
‘ With money, a dragon; without it, a worm.’ Con-
sequently, this person could not accept your hon-
ourable gift.”
Professor Winder waved farewell from the
“Abounding Wealth ” as the “ Yin-Yang ” departed.
Proceeding across the Celebes Sea, Chih, who
was delighted with the gift of the dragon’s claw,
said:
“ The Dragon is the God of Water and controls
rain. It is also an essence of the Yang, or male
principle, and so becomes a symbol of humanity
climbing to Heaven; an emblem of dignity and
wisdom, sovereignty and sagehood, from earliest
times.”
To which Brighten Airey replied:
“ What you say is true enough, but in more
recent days the dragon has become British, prob-
ably because it dwelt in the sea. Did you not
notice the colours and the order in which they were
ejected. They showed its claim to nationality. First
came blue, representing ‘God’; followed by green,
indicating safety, or ‘ save ’; then came rose, which
is ‘ our ’ colour; and white for ‘ gracious,’ with pur-
ple for royalty; the whole reading: ‘ God save our
gracious King.’ ”
“ I had not noticed particularly,” Chih confessed,
“ but took the colours to be the ‘ Five Correct
Colours,’ which are azure, yellow, black, white, and
carnation. Anciently, the dragon’s blood was pur-
ple and yellow; purple being the colour for Heaven,
and yellow, one of the * Five Correct Colours,’


representing earth. Perhaps the glare of the sun-
light confused the order and the tone of the ejec-
tions.”
“ No! ” said Brighten Airey, “ there was no mis-
taking them. The dragon belonged to the sea,
which is the home of the British.”
“At any rate,” continued Chih, “ in Chinese sculp-
ture the dragon plays with a foot on a round ball,
a pearl, as a symbol of the universe. The five-
clawed dragon is an Imperial variety, the five claws
being a ruler’s privilege.”
“ But,” said Hurry Fifty, “ the pearl is a symbol
of wealth, and the dragon plays with it because
man’s chief end is to become rich.”
Goodspeed, fearing that an argument was deve-
loping, remarked:
“ The discovery proves the theory of a Pacific
origin for Chinese archaic forms of the dragon,
which is the oldest ornament. And,” smiling at the
little elephant, who detested the sea, “ since its
swaying caused the ocean to swell, perhaps the
explosion would cause abatement.”
“ Was the dragon able to produce musical sounds
as well as coloured expressions?” asked Horn-
blower.
“ That is not known,” replied Chih, “ but the
great painter of dragons, Tung Yuan, of the Sung
dynasty, loved to paint them roaring to the moon.”
“ One would have thought more of them if they
had melodious voices,” said Homblower. “A love
of music places mankind above all creatures.”
“ Nevertheless,” said Heaviside, “ the orang-
outang, which is nearest humankind, has no love
for musical sounds.”


“Are you sure? ” interjected Honeybunn. “Per-
haps in captivity they fail to take an interest, but
in their natural surroundings the sound of music
may affect them.”
“ That should be proved easily,” said Brighten
Airey. “ Cape Couli Babang lies ahead, and pre-
sently we shall be over British North Borneo,
where we may descend in a forest and allow Horn-
blower to experiment.”
They passed along the coast, past Couli Babang
and over the mountain range, making for Sandakan.
Dense jungle appeared and the “Yin-Yang”
alighted in a natural clearing surrounded by
tropical forest. No sign of life could be seen. The
inhabitants of the jungle laid low at the sight of
this strange bird. Hornblower descended with his
automatic gramophone, and placing it at the edge
of the clearing, on the starboard side, switched on
the records and returned to cover on the plane.
All hands were hidden on the deck and awaited
developments. All except Chang Li Heng, who
detested gramophones and invariably grew impa-
tient at their sound. Chang withdrew to the stern
and, on the opposite side of the plane, looked dis-
consolate.
Caruso, in Massenet’s “Elegy,” sang to a still forest.
Beethoven’s “ Leonora ” overture followed, without
result save that a flock of Borneo sparrows flew
from the trees and passed across the clearing. Then
came “Abide With Me,” which Hornblower had
included by way of a change. The effect was start-
ling. From the branches of trees which had con-
cealed them, no less than seven orang-outangs
swung to the ground and made for the gramo-
phone.


“ They will smash it,” said Hornblower, pre-
paring to rush to the rescue.
“ No! ” said Goodspeed. “ Let them be.”
The seven orang-outangs sat themselves in a
ring round the gramophone and swayed in rhythm
with the music. The record ended and the circle
made no move. The opening notes of Melba in
“ Lo, Hear the Gentle Lark ” followed, when a
shrill trumpeting from Chang at the stern made
them jump. Instantly came several answering
trumpetings as a herd of wild elephants emerged
from the jungle on the port side, and with waving
trunks advanced towards the “ Yin-Yang.”
With the first call of Chang’s the orang-outangs
leapt from the ground, and the leader, an old ani-
mal, seized the gramophone and followed the others
to their refuge in the trees. Brighten Airey looked
at the elephants and told Goodspeed to get aloft,
and as the “ Yin-Yang ” rose into the air the melody
of Melba followed from a tree in the jungle.
Sadly, Hornblower looked over the side as the
plane departed. He had lost his machine and was
miserable. But Wu Chih appeared with a tray on
which stood glasses filled with beautiful pink liquid.
“ Pink gin sling,” said Wu, “ the pride of Sanda-
kan.” And within a few minutes the “ Yin-Yang ”
descended at the aerodrome and they were seated
in the Flying Club drinking pink slings.


CHAPTER NINE
WHEREIN THE DEMANDS OF BUSINESS ARE
ATTENDED TO IN SANDAKAN AND MANILA,
WITH VARIABLE RESULTS.
IN THE afternoon, when the temperature became
cooler, Chih-hu left the Club and went to the
Chinese quarter. Entering a Chinese restaurant to
order some dishes for their evening meal, he found
the proprietor playing guess fingers with an elderly
customer. Introducing himself, he learnt that the
customer was Po-10, a merchant who traded in
Borneo timbers. Chih apologised for disturbing
their game and requested them to continue.
The proprietor raised his closed hand, but not the
arm, level with his shoulder, and at the instant he
threw out the arm the other player called a number.
As the arm came straight some or none of his
fingers were extended, and the other won if the
correct number was called. It was not possible
to change the number intended by the thrower once
the arm started to descend, but both players had
to be quick. Chih remarked that guess fingers
was an excellent game, but he knew of one more
subtle which was played in Celestion.
This game was called “ the thimble and pea,” or,
sometimes, “ thimble rigging,” and was an admir-
able game which had been banned in the dark days.
It had originated in China and was played in the
East centuries before the people of Celestion be-
came expert players. Producing three small red-
lacquered pots, and a black and two green ivory
balls from under his smock, Chih placed the pots in


a row on the table with the balls beneath. Then
he rapidly changed the positions of the pots, rolling
the balls in the process, and finally placed them
with the black ball apparently beneath the centre
pot, requesting the merchant to lift the pot which
hid the black ball. Po-lo picked up the centre pot
and found a green. Chih then lifted another and
revealed the black. Po-lo laughed at his mistake
and Chih showed the way to manipulate the pots
and balls by sleight-of-hand, and expressed surprise
that an up-to-date city like Sandakan was without
its thimbles and peas. Perhaps a thriving trade
could be made by selling the trick, if placed in able
hands. Po-lo was agreeable, and a deal was con-
cluded by which one hundred logs of temple timber
were to be shipped to Celestion in return for a
gross of lacquered pots with ivory balls. The mer-
chant knew that the timber-getters would be
delighted with the trick, and both were satisfied.
Unable to discover further business, Chih
returned to the “ Yin-Yang,” and having collected
all hands, departed, taking care to telephone the
order to Celestion.
Flying over the Mindoro Sea, they alighted at
Manila, where the aerodrome had been a park laid
out by Daniel Burnham when the Americans
guided the Filipinos. A section was reserved
for each Pacific country with the runway coloured
accordingly, and Brighten Airey had no difficulty
in placing the azure-blue of Celestion.
On landing, one hundred and eight uniformed
officials appeared and each presented an account
for one day’s garage fees in various forms, the last
of which was for official attendance on arrival.
Brighten Airey was annoyed until he counted the


total cost and found that it was reasonable. The
Filipinos, he observed, were determined to be
efficient.
Walking through the city, many churches, built
in the time of the Spaniards, attracted Chih’s atten-
tion. They were thronged with people who brought
beautiful flowers and vegetables and laid them be-
fore their patron saints. So he called on the
Governor of the city and offered his congratulations
on the splendid churches. The only way they might
be improved, and this was an inconsiderable trifle,
would be to cover the buildings with tiles of
Celestion. These tiles were made from a white
porcelain clay obtained in the island of the Kan-
garoo, and glazed with the most beautiful colours
to be seen around the Pacific. The cost was insig-
nificant and could be met by an exchange of covers.
Filipino straw hats would make the summer as
acceptable for Celestians as their tiles would grace
the churches of Manila.
The Governor was pleased with the suggestion
and sent Chih to interview the Minister for
Exchanges, who drove so hard a bargain that Chih
was compelled to include a dozen platypus,
modelled in the same clay and of various poses,
which necessitated the business being referred to
Senor Tortue.
“It would never do,” the Senor said. “ The
people of Celestion rejoice in rabbit fur hats, in
all weathers, and it would be impossible to induce
them to wear any other.”
With a crestfallen look, Chih explained to the
Minister that a law had been passed compelling
Celestians to wear rabbit fur hats dyed red. That
evening he went to bed, refusing to join a


party which went to the dance hall of Manila.
Brighten Airey led the party, which included
Honeybunn, Hurry Fifty and Hornblower, Heavi-
side remaining on duty. Hurry had taken particular
care with his attire, and in his tie of Celestian blue
was a pin bearing the dragon s black pearl.
The dance hall was of immense size and seemed
large enough to hold the population of Manila,
where dancing was universal. At the centre was a
bandstand where the orchestra played, and the floor
was divided into two sections, one for officials and
the other for the people. Both sections were
packed. The Filipinos were excellent dancers, and
the women in particular waltzed divinely.
When midnight struck, the Governor and his
staff retired and the dance continued with the offi-
cial side deserted. The “ Yin-Yang ” party were
good dancers and revelled in the old Spanish
waltzes. Hurry Fifty was in his element, but to
quench the thirst which the hot night and motion
developed he drank too freely of Luzon wine. At
three o’clock began a dance which had originated
at Colorado, in the United States, and was called
the Holy Roller. With sedate movement the
dancers began and waltzed faster and faster until,
on a crash from the orchestra, all fell to the floor
and began rolling over and over in pairs to the
accompaniment of rolling music. Hurry Fifty had
for a partner a Filipino lady who was an excellent
dancer but exceedingly fat. When she rolled on top
of him Hurry could not move. In this predicament
he lay for a moment and then began to struggle.
But the harder he struggled the firmer grew the
weight of the lady, and with his expiring breath
Hurry called for help. The next pair of rollers


heard the call and came to his aid. Together they
lifted the stout lady to her feet, when she collapsed
and was removed by her friends. Then the man
placed Hurry upright, and in a cultured English
voice, advised him to take the air outside. He was
a well-built Englishman with a head of red hair
and a fiery moustache. Hurry, wobbling a little on
his feet, put his hand to his tie and found the pearl
gone. Thereupon he lost command of himself and
shouted for his pearl, and for his recent partner, in
abusive terms. Immediately a crowd gathered, and
some advised Hurry to exercise more control of
himself, when a huge figure of a man came upon
the scene. It was the thrower-out, an Irishman
who stood seven feet three in his socks and was
proportionately built. Taking a glance at Hurry
Fifty and the Englishman standing opposite, he
put out his arms and gathered them up by the
waist and walked to the door, followed by Brighten
Airey and the others. Outside, he placed them on
their feet and in a friendly voice urged Hurry to
be off to his ship. “And if I were you, Ginger
George,” he added, “ I would keep clear of the
dance hall for a week or two.” All looked up at the
agreeable giant; to utter a word in protest was
impossible.
They departed down the road and Brighten Airey
thanked the stranger for his kindly help. Ginger
George drew a case from his pocket and handed a
card which bore the title “ Hon. George Drink-
water.” “If I should hear anything of the pearl,
where may you be found?” he asked, and on
receiving the name of Senor Tortue at Celestion,
he bowed and went off in the darkness.


Dawn was breaking as they boarded the “ Yin-
Yang,” and putting Hurry to bed, Brighten Airey
returned to the deck and met Chih, who said :
“ Let’s be off.”
Then the plane rose and, to the surprise of the
aerodrome attendants, who expected she would
require petrol, sailed away with hours still to run
of her uncompleted stop.


CHAPTER TEN
WHICH INTRODUCES CHINA AND A GLIMPSE OF
ITS HISTORY IN T’ANG, WHICH THROUGH THE
OBSCURITY OF COMMUNISM IS BEING BORN
AGAIN, AND EUROPE IS REVEALED IN ITS TRUE
LIGHT.
*LL were sleepy as Manila dropped out of sight
and Chih settled himself on deck, but not for
long. Wu Chih announced that SenorTortue was
calling.
“A message has come,” said the Senor, from the
Consul-General of the Four Seas, in China, who
was captured by brigands when visiting Si-an-fu
in Shensi. He was searching for a landscape by
Wang Wei, and is held for ransom at the Moun-
tain of Dragons’ Brightness. The brigands demand
a keg of Four Seas Punch, which they call the
‘ Fifth Precious Thing,’ but it cannot be secured
owing to the country being disturbed by Com-
munists and Confucianists, who are everywhere
and seize every drop of ransom which is sent. No
one can reach him. Here he has been a captive
for eight months, and in desperation wrote an
appeal to Celestion, where he was stationed before
proceeding to China. It would be as well to pro-
ceed with all speed to Si-an-fu and see what can
be done to rescue the Consul-General.”
Chih rang off with a smile of delight and hurried
to tell Brighten Airey, who increased their speed,
and the “ Yin-Yang ” shot across the China Sea.
Brighten Airey knew of Four Seas Punch, but he
asked: “What is this picture which the Consul-
General has been after? ”


And Chih replied:
“ Standing on a plain near the Wei Ho river
in Shensi, approximately at the centre of China, is
Si-an-fu, which between the sixth and ninth cen-
turies, in the T’ang dynasty, was called Chang-an,
or Lasting Peace. Chang-an was a great capital of
China, populated with two million people who came
and went through nine gates and passed thirty-six
Imperial palaces.
“ In the eighth century, Hsuan Tsung led the
way. He was a perfect leader; patron of the arts;
a musician, establishing opera at the Pear Garden;
while Yang Kuei-fei, his favourite beauty, was
matchless in China. Myriads of mansions adorned
the city, whose streets were crowded with mandarin
carts drawn by sleek, black oxen with vermilion
harness.
“ The period may be likened to the Elizabethan
in England. Greek influence was reaching
Chang-an, coming probably from Gandara, in the
valley of the Indus in north-west India, whence it
spread to Samarkand and thence to China.
Nestorian missionaries built a church, and all
creeds were welcome provided they did not inter-
fere with each other. Then, as now, the Chinese
attitude to gods was one of respectful neglect.
“ Chinese literature was possessed of charming
style about the beginning of the Christian era.
This period has never been excelled for clear,
descriptive writing and beauty in style. Through-
out all periods Chinese literary taste was not
affected by foreign importations, nor has the form
been influenced by outside script. Always the
charm of writing was attended by style in calli-
graphy, Wang Hsi-chih, of the fourth century, was


the greatest calligraphist, his writing being vigorous
as a startled dragon. And at Chang-an, in Tang.
a perfect style of writing was established. It was
not until the Sung dynasty that block printing was
invented by Feng Tao.
“ T’ang was the greatest period of poetry, and
poets were flourishing. Li Po, China’s greatest
lyric poet, dwelt at Chang-an in the eighth century.
Tu Fu was another great poet of the same period,
who loved Chang-an where the Court was brilliant,
and where Li Po was his greatest friend. Po Chu-i
and Han Yu were later in T’ang and, too, were
masters of their art.
« Posters were used anciently in China, and as
wall literature took the place of newspapers, offi-
cial notices sometimes being given in verse. Jour-
nalism followed, and the ‘ Peking Gazette,’ which
is the oldest newspaper, was established a thousand
years ago.
“it was Tsai Lun, who invented paper, and
Weng T’ien, who invented camel-hair brushes,
which paved the way for the greatest painters of
Chang-an. Wu Tao-tzu, friend and rival of Wang
Wei, was master of the brush line. He was born
at the beginning of the eighth century, and though
none of his originals have survived, copies are
beautiful. The temple walls of Chang-an were rich
with his work, and the temple on Wang Shun Hill,
twenty miles to the south-east, was noted for his
wall paintings, which Po Chu-i described as fresh
when he saw them in the ninth century, but by the
tenth they had vanished.
“ Methods of painting in ink were varied. Wu
Tao-tzu was master of the line only, in black or
red, which was called po-hua, or outline in ink.


Then came mo-hua, or ink painting with washes
for modelling, and p’o-mo, or break ink, a wash
drawing with line of ink worked into the picture.
Finally, Wang Hsia, at the beginning of the ninth
century, was a master of the pure ink wash, or ink
flinging style, without preliminary outline.
“ Wang Wei, the painter who was mentioned,
was contemporary with Wu Tao-tzu, and was a
master of the p’o-mo, or broken ink style. He
painted landscapes in ink monochrome, and with
Wu Tao-tzu produced greater landscapes than any
which Europe has known. Unfortunately, there is
no doubt that the painting which the Consul-
General sought was a copy. His works have
perished, but Wang Wei was also a poet and his
lines have survived.
“ For myself,” continued Chih-hu, “ I have a
liking for Chao Yuan-ch’ang, of Sung, who was a
painter, and keeper of the observatory in Shu State,
and as an astronomer drew celestial maps.
“ The Sung painters were splendid, too. Kuo
Hsi wrote a great essay on landscape painting in
which his old twisted pines and cedars, with
gnarled knots and scaly limbs, wrestled with frosts
and snow. Like the trees, man’s life is full of
struggle with misfortunes and pain, stamping the
planes of an old face with wrinkles in which Nature
becomes a mirror of the man. But Kuo Hsi was
no less a painter, and said that he who studies the
painting of bamboos should take a branch and cast
its shadow on a moonlit wall, and there observe its
beauty.
“And Li Lung Mien, another Sung painter, was
also an historian, a poet, a prose writer, a connois-
seur and a collector, and, perhaps, the most accom-


plished man in Chinese history. He was best as
a painter, and dwelt on the Mountain of Dragons’
Brightness to which we are going.”
Wu Chih, who was watching through a port in
the bow, uttered a cry of delight, and turned to
acquaint Chih-hu that China was in sight. Before
he could reach the Master and Chih, Bias Bay, the
haunt of pirates, which lies north-west of Hong-
kong, was passed and they were over the Flowery
Land. Wu Chih was delighted, but Chih continued:
“ The people of China began in Southern Shan-si
and extended east, west, south, and later north, as
told in the Shu King, or Book of Historical Docu-
ments, which is the oldest of the classics.
“ Nowadays, the Chinese prefer hot drinks in hot
weather, and write vertically from right to left.
Their mourning colour is white, and they begin
dinner with dessert and end with soup. Tsao Chun,
the Kitchen God, being universally worshipped, is
God of the Stove. They visit friends before meals,
and when a meal is ended they depart. Neverthe-
less, they are the most courteous people.
“ Perhaps, as many of their customs are different
to European ways, and many places and things
bear names which sound fanciful to sober-minded
foreigners, the idea is sometimes held that China is
a land of make-believe. Po Sung-ling, who was a
brilliant writer in Kang Hsi’s reign, said:
“ ‘ I do not believe in the irregularity of natural
phenomena, and regard as evil spirits only those
who injure their neighbours.’
“ For the most part, Chinese novels and tales are
much the same as elsewhere in the world. Ching
Hua Yuan wrote a novel called ‘A Journey to the
Court of Gentlemen,’ in which trade dealings are


reversed and affairs are made to appear ridiculous
in exactly the same way that European writers have
mocked their world. Otherwise, the people of
China are not fundamentally different to people
elsewhere.”
As they passed over a broad lake, Chih-hu
remarked:
“ There lies the ‘ Money Pool ’ where Lui I, in
the T’ang dynasty, married a daughter of the
Dragon King. Tung Ting Lake has many legends
and folk-lore and freshwater dolphins, which
accounts for most of the tales.
“ Distances in China vary in a way that makes
some people impatient. A town may be given as
thirty li away, and forty back, which sounds
impossible until walked, when it becomes exceed-
ingly accurate.
“In the art of government, China has been
through the phases which the European world is
introducing, and may follow the same path once
again. When Wu Ti was Emperor in the first cen-
tury 8.C., he appointed Commissioners of Taxation
to collect income tax from the rich, and reduced for-
tunes that were excessively large. Merchants and
shopkeepers were forbidden to make huge profits
at the expense of the people. Transport and delivery
were placed in charge of the State, and artisans
under official control. It was the first anti-
profiteering legislation in China, and aimed to keep
prices at a reasonable level.
“Again, when Wang An Shih, who was a famous
socialist, of Sung, became the Emperor’s favourite
minister, he nationalised commerce, industry, agri-
culture and conscription. He introduced a new
monetary system and tried to equalise wealth and


uplift the poor, relieving them from all taxation,
and making State laws to assist them generously.
It all ended in the rich becoming poor, and the poor
poorer, and An Shih was banished in dis-
grace.
“ People will never learn. Below us is China
struggling with exactly the same difficulties as
occurred under Wu Ti and Wang An Shih. And
these difficulties have become world-wide, affecting
all nations. Communism in various forms is pro-
claimed as a solution, just as it was under Wang
An Shih, and ignoring the results which always fol-
lowed the levelling of mankind. To place the whole
of mankind on a level cannot affect the cause,
which is instinctive in all peoples, save a few who
are insular and cannot lead.
“ The strongest instinct in mankind is to be
creative. Once creativeness is established in his
work, man is not concerned with trivial things
such as trying to bring humanity to a level. His
leaders lead because their work is essential. Never-
theless, until new creativeness is established, no
leaders are secure because they fail to achieve a
path which leads mankind onwards. And mankind
must move.
“ No matter what his colour or race may be, as a
human being he is stirred with a fundamental in-
stinct and must seek to make his works live. To
do this he has to make contact with a source of
ideas outside his own, which have decayed. And
this can only be accomplished by the contact of
two peoples of different creative feeling in the past.
The Chinese and the European are two such
peoples. And their contact in Celestion has opened


the path for the world to build a new period in the
history of humanity.
“ There are many who still are blind, and destroy
each other in their blindness. And the warning
voice of those who know passes without heed.
And blindly, without reason, mankind follows the
course which Nature decrees, and in the end arrives
at the goal. Perhaps it is the way of the Supreme
Ultimate. But man should be able to guide him-
self, and his God would think better of him.”
“The Yang-tze-kiang lies below us,” said
Brighten Airey, as they passed the muddy waters
of the great river. “ China has noble streams, but
few fine horses.”
That is true,” replied Chih, “ but there was a
time when the breed was excellent. Stone carvings
in Shantung, which were made before the Christian
era, showed the most beautiful horses in Chinese
art. They were better than Grecian horses,
although cut in incised lines, rubbings of which
were made by Professor Chavannes and taken to
Paris. The pottery horses of T’ang also are beau-
tiful and show strength with their gracefulness.
“All horses are too slow in comparison with the
said Goodspeed, who had joined
them.
Perhaps! replied Chih, “but the importance
of pace may be exaggerated.”
At all events, said Goodspeed, as they crossed
the Tcin-ling mountains, “it would take a clerk
on the abacus board all his time to check our
mileage.”
“There over the plain is the Mountain of
Dragons’ Brightness,” said Chih, “and Si-an-fu
beyond.”


“And the time we have taken,” replied Good-
speed, “ is a few minutes under three hours.”
The Mountain of Dragons’ Brightness, with the
Monastery of the Blue Dragon nestling amongst
trees on its slopes, was a wooded hill from which,
as the “ Yin-Yang ” approached, men could be
seen leaving the trees and hastening towards a
stream of people who were flocking out of Si-an-fu
towards the foothills on the south-west edge of
the plain. They wondered what was the cause of
the exodus, but, under Chih’s direction, decided to
land on top of the hill, within a walled enclosure
around a temple building which was surrounded by
pines and cedars. Not a soul was to be seen.
Brighten Airey and Chih-hu walked quietly to
the doorway of the temple and peered within.
Seated at a low table, the Consul-General for the
Four Seas and a large companion were playing
Wei-ch’i, Brighten Airey introduced themselves,
and the Consul-General, having acknowledged their
greetings, made known his companion, Hi Ho, the
brigand commander, who was attired in a black
smock adorned with the phoenix in red silk and
gold. Informing the Consul-General that they had
come from Celestion in response to his appeal, the
Master turned to the Commander and said that all
his men had gone. Hi Ho bowed and apologised
for not offering tea, which, therefore, would not be
possible.
The Consul-General expressed his gratitude for
their prompt arrival and delight at his restored
freedom.
“ But what,” he said, “is the trouble with the
brigands? Why have they left without warning? ”
To which Chih replied


“All Si-an-fu is flocking to the foothills, as you
can see for yourself.”
They walked to the wall at the crest of the hill
and looked across the plain, where a mass of people
were hastening as fast as they could, and the
brigands were joining them. Hi Ho looked at the
throng and then, politely asking to be excused,
climbed over the wall and disappeared down the
hill.
“ There is something afoot of which we know
nothing,” said the Consul-General.
Chih-hu was preoccupied, but he said, turning to
the Consul;
“ y°u care to venture with us on the “Yin-
Yang we would be delighted to convey you to
Peiping.”
“ Nothing would give me greater pleasure,”
replied the Consul-General, “provided that my
company does not discommode you.”
“ The pleasure will be ours,” said Chih, “ and
we shall start shortly. In the meantime, pray
excuse me.”
Then, to the others’ amazement, Chih climbed
the wall and followed the path taken by Hi Ho.
Brighten Airey and the Consul-General looked at
each other, but passed no remarks, and their uneasi-
ness was broken by Goodspeed, who joined them
and said:
“ What a Pity that Fu-hai Gin and Ginger Beer
is not procurable on the Mountain of Dragons’
Brightness. A drink would be just the thing.”
“Have you tried ‘Four Seas Punch?’” said the
Consul-General. “It is an excellent pick-me-up.
But come and try it! I still have half a bottle
which the brigands overlooked.”


They entered the temple and the Consul filled
liqueur glasses with the punch, which all agreed
was admirable.
“ It is very strong,” said the Consul-General, and
refilled their glasses.
Under the stimulus of “ Four Seas Punch ” the
Consul became enthusiastic about the Wang Wei,
which he had found in Si-an-fu, and discoursed on
its beauty. Brighten Airey and Goodspeed listened
with respect, but at the end of an hour their uneasi-
ness about Chih-hu could not be controlled, and
when Wu Chih brought morning tea they ques-
tioned him.
“ Chih-hu will be here soon,” said Wu Chih
simply.
And shortly afterwards Chih reappeared, with
apologies for keeping them waiting. He had taken
the dragon’s claw and deposited it in the Monas-
tery of the Blue Dragon, in accordance with Handle
P. Winder’s wish. They were relieved to hear it.
“ Well! It’s time we were leaving,” said Brighten
Airey, leading the way to the “ Yin-Yang.”
As they crossed the space from the temple, Hi Ho
appeared, followed by two brigands each wheeling
a strange circular creature. Hi Ho’s face was
smiling as he declared that his men were following
with hundreds more.
“ Our brigand days are done,” he cried. “ The
Shensi super-germ has come to light.”
“What do you mean?’’said the Consul-General.
“Is your profession of brigandage to be thrown
overboard? ”
“It looks like it,” replied Hi Ho. “ But come
along, and while we boil our germs, perhaps an


account of these honourable beings may prove
interesting.”
Directing his men to fill a large boiler which
stood behind the temple building, and to light a
fire beneath it, Hi Ho then gave the following
account;
“ Years ago, before Europeans came, Shensi was
contented and happy, on some days in the week.
Every now and then a pestilence kept the popula-
tion in reasonable check. Then missionaries
arrived, particularly from the United States of
America, and taught sanitation, with the result that
germs decreased. But the population increased
and famines became more regular. Missionaries
made great efforts to supply food for the afflicted
ones, but with the coming of the world crisis the
task became more difficult, while the population
still increased. Eventually, many missionaries were
compelled to leave Shensi and attend to their own
people.
“ Then rumours of strange creatures in the foot-
hills yonder disturbed the people in Si-an-fu and
the neighbourhood. Stories began to go around
the city about the depredations of beings which
dwelt in caves and holes on the distant ranges.
They took whelps and sucking pigs, and even
attacked young donkeys. Country folk, it was
declared, dare not pass the night out-of-doors with-
out a large fire for protection, and firewood was
scarce. Gardens on the plain began losing beds of
lettuce, and chickens were taken from hen-houses.
Word went around of a farmer who had become
rich without farming, and suspicion was aroused.
Still the depredations continued, and became much
worse. People in the city began to grow uneasy


and suspect that some strange influence was at
work.
“ In Si-an-fu this morning the news was spread
that fortunes were waiting on the hills for those
who cared to gather them, and one or two returned
with super-germs. Then the populace immediately
set forth to capture the germs, such as we have
brought with us.
“ The super-germ, as you see, has an insular body
of the size of a Ford motor wheel, covered with
rubber-like tentacles. At the centre is a large eye
with a blue pupil, white iris, and red rim around,
which is attached by a gelatinous substance that
does not revolve when the body moves. Around
this eye is an axle-shaped hub connected with the
circular body by radiating limbs of hard substance
to which are attached feeding claws and mouths.
“ When boiled the eye drops out, and the claws
and mouths may be detached easily, leaving a
natural motor wheel which is unsurpassed for dura-
bility and comfort, and for which a ready market
is waiting.”
While they stood watching the boiling, the
Consul-General inspected the super-germs, particu-
larly the cogs on the outer rims, which Hi Ho
declared could not slip. And when Brighten Airey
again suggested boarding the “Yin-Yang,” the
Consul-General announced that, “after all, he had
better go to Si-an-fu and collect his bags. It would
be unnecessary to bother them further, since the
populace would be busy boiling fortunes.” Looking
across at the smoke of countless fires arising in
Si-an-fu, it was evident that the super-germ was
boiling.


“ Europe, of course,” he said, “is further
advanced than China or Celestion, and so is
engrossed in a return tc( Nature, following the
ethics of Rosseau in the eighteenth century.
Natural tyres will be received with acclamation,
and perhaps my country, the Four Seas, may reap
some small benefit by their introduction.”
Bidding adieu, the Consul-General for the Four
Seas climbed over the wall and disappeared in the
direction of Si-an-fu.
As they boarded the “ Yin-Yang ” Brighten Airey
remarked to Chih-hu that probably the Senor would
be interested in the tyres.
“No!” said Chih-hu. “Celestion, like China, is
further along the road which leads to reality, in
which creative energy dominates life. Europe has
still to flounder through the bog-holes of Nature.”
The sun was overhead as they rose into the air
and passed swiftly towards Peiping.


CHAPTER ELEVEN
WHEREIN “LOVEILLARY ATTRACTION” AND
“ EVIDENTIAL ASHES ” WHILE AWAY A FLIGHT
ACROSS SHAN SI AND PE-CHI-LI IN NORTH
CHINA.
AFTER lunch, sitting in the saloon, Brighten
Airey remarked, “ Si-an-fu must have been an
attractive city when called Chang-an. Is there any
evidence of its influence reaching Europe?”
Chih-hu replied:
“ In those days Europe was a dismal place, a
continent unaware of the world outside. Its civil-
ization of Roman days had expired and the Renais-
sance was not yet born. Nevertheless, Chang-an
was responsible for a custom which ultimately
spread over Europe, although it was a mistake on
that country’s part in the first place.
“ Yuan I dwelt in Chang-an at the beginning of
its greatness. He was a young poet and painter,
and aimed to become famous in these arts. One
day, while he stood in the roadway contemplating
a bridge over the Silver River, with the idea of
composing a picture, a mandarin cart passed so
close that in jumping backwards he almost fell
over. The cart had a hooded cover of dark blue
with a light blue border, golden varnished wood,
and vermilion wheels, harnessed to a white mule
with vermilion harness. A blue silk awning shel-
tered the driver, who also was dressed in blue.
“As he jumped back, Yuan I caught the flickering
smile of a beautiful girl who was sitting in the cart.


He fell in love at first sight, and, following dis-
creetly, saw the cart enter a gate in a quiet road
sheltered by trees. Making judicious enquiries, he
learnt that it was the residence of a wealthy man-
darin, who he knew would not receive him. Nor
could he expect the lady, I Yu, who, he learnt, was
the mandarin’s only daughter, to offer any
encouragement. Nevertheless, Yuan I was urged
on by his love, which gave him no rest, and he
hung about the gate, hoping to see the lady pass
again.
“ The house stood on a corner, and in the side
road he found a sunny spot where a stone against
the high wall offered a seat under the branches of
a spreading fig tree which hung over the wall.
And here he spent many days dreaming of his love,
I Yu.
“ Seated on the stone at the foot of the wall, with
the sun shedding a pleasant warmth, one morning
he meditated on the power of water, its capillary
attraction, and the might of the Dragon. The
warmth made him drowsy and he fell asleep. His
head sank back against the wall and his open
mouth was filled with sunshine, until a ripe fig,
landing between his lips, awoke him with a start.
Looking up, he saw a pair of sparkling eyes, laugh-
ing at him on top of the wall. It was the lady,
I Yu, who tied her silken girdle to a limb of the
fig and Yuan I clambered to a seat beside her. As
he reached the top, he exclaimed:
Loveillary attraction! ’
And she, with a ripe fig on her lips, retorted:
What a lovelily word! ’
“ ‘ It is the love between us,’ he explained, ‘ which


has drawn us together, just as water is attracted by
water.’
“ ‘ But does the attraction persist when warm? ’
she asked.
“ ‘ Of course,’ he replied, ‘ even when boiling.’
“ The fig tree by the wall became their meeting
place, and love blossomed under the spreading
leaves. At the hour of the Snake, which is between
ten and twelve in the morning, while they were
hidden in the branches, the mandarin, her father,
passed along the road at the foot of the fig. Yuan
I was fearful lest he should discover their trysting
place. But I Yu laughed, and, plucking a leaf
from the tree, told her lover to hide behind it,
when he would become invisible to prying eyes.
Thereafter she presented him with a leaf to hide
their meetings on the wall.
“And then she came with swollen eyes and the
news that her father had arranged her wedding
with a wealthy merchant. All her protestations
had proved useless; he would not be moved. Their
meetings became saddened by the thought of the
approaching end.
“ Early in the morning of her wedding day, I Yu
and Yuan I met on the wall and decided to die
together. When searchers came to the foot of
the fig, they found the lovers clasped in each other’s
arms with a fig leaf covering them.
“ In course of years, the story of their love be-
came a classic in the annals of Chang-an. At the
festival of lovers, in the springtime of the year,
young men wore fig leaves as symbols of love, the
leaf having the virtue of protecting love from all
who sought to prevent it, particularly parents.
“The Nestorians in Chang-an, observing this


custom and not understanding the reason for it,
mistook the fig leaves for symbols of chastity. This
appealed to their Christian virtues, and they sent
accounts to Europe of the Festival of Love at
Chang-an with tales of young men adorned with
leaves to cover their purity.
Thus, the fig leaf appeared in Europe, where it
became attached to statues of young men to cover
the nakedness of their figures. Unfortunately, the
leaf was rather large for the purpose, and in later
years the vine was substituted, or sometimes the
ivy, and remains as a symbol to hide that which it
was intended to honour.”
“Tales of devices to cover sex relationships,”
said Brighten Airey, “ are not always in the same
form. The nearest experience that happened in my
memory occurred in a country train approaching
Celestion. 5
As the train started from a small station, the
door of the compartment was thrown open and a
stranger entered hurriedly. Apologising for his
abrupt entrance, he explained that he was sitting
alone in the next compartment, when a lady entered.
He feared that she might accuse him of unpardonable
molestation, and as he did not smoke, and would
not have the protection of a long ash on a cigar,
hke the person in the old story, when accused before
the railway officials, the safest retreat was to seek
another compartment.
However, when the lady alighted at the next
station, the sight of her was such
r> aV u been necessar y 35 evidence of her virtue ”
cau,e,.h aps , a he Stranger left the compartment be-
remark aV j WaS no ' youn S and attractive,”
remarked Goodspeed.


44 At what period do you think the story of the
cigar ash originated? ” said Brighten Airey.
44 In all probability,” replied Goodspeed, 44 it dates
back to the time of the first train.”
44 It may well be much older, said Chih-hu.
“ There were, at one time, in ancient China, the
4 Three Brothers of the Peach Orchard.’ Liu Pei,
a hawker of shoes, was the oldest, Chang Fei, a
butcher, the youngest; and the second, Kuan Yu,
became Kuan Yi, the God of War. The three swore
an oath of allegiance and fraternity, at Chang Fei’s
farm, after sacrificing a black ox and a white horse,
with correct accessories. Their exploits are
recorded in the ‘ Story of the Three Kingdoms,’
and Kuan Yu became a great military leader and
hero. He died in the third century, but his fame
increased and in the twelfth century he was made
4 Faithful and Loyal Leader,’ and soon afterwards
became 4 Magnificent Prince and Pacifactor. Then
Emperor Wen, of the Yuan dynasty, created him
‘ Warrior Prince and Civilizer,’ and finally, Wan Li,
of the Ming dynasty, elected him as Kuan Ti,
4 Faithful and Loyal Great Ti, Supporter of Heaven
and Protector of the Kingdom.’ Kuan Yu also be-
came one of the three gods of literature. In his
honour sixteen hundred state temples were erected,
and thousands of smaller, and during the last cen-
ury his fame increased still further. In 1856 he
appeared in the sky and turned the battle in favour
of capitalists.
44 Perhaps Kuan Yu’s greatest victory occurred
when he proved his fidelity to his two Brothers.
“After a gallant fight with Ts’ao Ts’ao he was
taken prisoner. His despicable enemy determined
to break the loyalty of the 4 Three Brothers, and


accordingly captured the wife of Liu Pei. Choosing
a bedroom without a window, Ts’ao Ts’ao first
placed the lady in bed, and then, after searching
Kuan Yu and taking everything but his clothes,
locked them in for the night.
“ Immediately the guard outside the door was
called by Kuan Yu, who complained that he could
not find his way to the couch in the darkness. Being
more sympathetic than his master, the guard gave
Kuan Yu a lighted taper and locked the door again.
“ In the early morning, Ts’ao Ts’ao, having called
Liu Pei to witness his ‘ Brother’s ’ infidelity, threw
open the door and revealed Kuan Yu holding the
last strip of his smouldering undershirt, and the
lady sound asleep on the bed. With a smile on his
face, Kuan Yu pointed to the floor before him,
where a line of ashes showed how he had torn his
clothes into strips and kept the fire burning.”
“ There is a similarity about these tales of burn-
ing lights and preserved virtue,” said Brighten
Airey, “ which probably is due to the same origin
in antiquity. Do you believe that the story of
Kuan Yu is authentic”
“It is an allegory,” said Chih, “of the Three
Kingdoms.”
“ Maybe,” replied the Master, “ but for my part
it seems that as Liu Pei was the eldest of the three,
and this adventure happened when Kuan Yu had
become a famous military leader, most likely the
wife was advanced in years, like the lady in the
railway compartment. Otherwise, it would not
have been so easy for Kuan Yu to have burnt his
undershirt,”
“ What intrigues me about Chih-hu’s tale,” said
g 97


Goodspeed, “ are the titles won by Kuan Yu: Faith-
ful and Loyal and Magnificent Prince are much the
same as Most High, Most Distinguished, and Most
Excellent Orders, bestowed at one time on citizens
of Celestion.”
“But here we are at Peiping,” said Brighten
Airey, and they landed in the aerodrome, which lay
beside the legation quarter.


CHAPTER TWELVE
WHEREIN PEIPING FAILS TO AROUSE ENTHU-
SIASM AS A MODERN CITY, AND RESORT IS
MADE TO A DETECTIVE STORY IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE SCENE.
CHIH-HU set forth filled with eagerness to
renew friendships at his old University, where
he expected to find ideas and doings at one with
the movement in Celestion. And Wu Chih dis-
appeared quietly in the direction of the Street of
the Well of Sweet Water where they had dwelt.
Brighten Airey and Goodspeed hired rickshas
at the entrance to the aerodrome and went to see
the lovely architecture which had influenced the
building of Celestion.
Goodspeed was the better qualified of the two to
express opinions on architecture, having studied this
art while engaged as an engineer. In his opinion,
after seeing the Temple of Heaven, Temple of Agri-
culture, and the Temple of Confucius, to say nothing
of many other monuments, and several old houses
to boot, the masterworks of Peiping excelled
in colour and beauty of surroundings all that which
had been built in forming Celestion. But in plan-
ning and control of buildings, forming a homo-
geneous whole, Celestion had improved on the
older city. And while the Temple of Heaven was
a structure unexcelled, with a blue tiled roof and
walls of divine hues, and the Temple of Agriculture,
too, with its exquisite facade and roof of marvellous
“black” tiles, were beyond comparisons, neverthe-
less, the simplicity and strength of Celestian colour


and form, uniting the whole, caused him to prefer
the city of the South.
Peiping appeared to have changed little since it
was called Peking. Liu-li-chang still was the
street full of antique shops, which held a larger
assortment of imitations, while needlework and
rugs were manufactured with less artistry because
no new creativeness had appeared. Modern Peiping
was dormant outwardly, but underneath change
was stirring.
After dinner, which was a doleful meal, Chih-hu
being depressed, Hurry Fifty announced that he
had occupied the afternoon, while he was on duty,
in writing a story for a magazine in Celestion.
This story was told by a professional story-teller,
who had called in search of an audience, and whiled
away half-an-hour for a few cents.
Honeybunn immediately pressed for a reading
of the literary effort, and Hurry agreed. The story
was called “ Strange Disappearance of the House-
hold of Hou.”
“ In the days of Kang Hsi there dwelt on the
outskirts of Peiping a simple soul, Hou Tu, who
was an alchemist. Hou dwelt with his wife in a
house with a small yard on each side of it. Here
he practiced geomancy and eked out a scanty living
by the sale of elixirs of life. His wife was simple,
too, but a garrulous woman with a voice which had
been likened to the screech of a wheelbarrow in a
tunnel. Nevertheless, she was a good wife and did
her best to keep the household solvent, although
she secretly dreaded that some morning, on
awakening, she would find that Hou Tu had drunk
one of his elixirs and disappeared.
“ Despite his efforts in making palatable brews,


which he did with much discretion, although ham-
pered by the excessive cost of celestial drugs, Hou’s
art declined because customers became too accus-
tomed to his potions. At length necessity com-
pelled him to resort to advertising as a means of
attracting fresh patients.
“ One morning, at the hour of the Hare, a neigh-
bour, passing on the road, was alarmed by the sight
of Hou Tu, who came running from his house in a
state of agitation. His wife, his dog, and all his
ducks had sailed into the upper air after drinking
an elixir which he had prepared the previous
evening. The neighbour advised him to acquaint
the magistrate without delay.
“ Hou Tu went to the yamen of Chang Pu-liang,
the magistrate of the district, and reported that his
wife had stolen a bottle of elixir, which was freshly
brewed, and reaching the courtyard, imagining that
he was following her, drank of the elixir and sailed
aloft, emitting an awful shriek as she found herself
in the air. Rushing from the house, he saw her
about a li high, and on sight of him she dropped the
bottle in her alarm. The dog, which had followed
him from the house, thereupon lapped up some of
the liquid on the ground and promptly went after
his mistress. Hou swooned with fright and amaze-
ment at the threshold of the door leading to the
yard. He awoke in time to see the last of his
eight ducks setting out for heaven after finishing
the spilt elixir.
“ Chang Pu-liang, having assured himself that
Hou was neither drunk nor demented, and although
he did not believe a word of the story, told Hou Tu
to lead him to the scene of the departures. Accom-
panied by a couple of officials—who, nowadays,


would be called assistant detectives, the magistrate
examined the evidence of flight.
“ On the floor of the yard, which was newly
sanded, footprints of a woman and a dog showed
clearly, leading from the doorway to a central spot,
and on the opposite side, the footmarks of eight
ducks led from a small enclosure against the yard
wall to the same position. Examining the tracks,
which ended in a rough circle, all were clear and
showed no sign of disturbance, indicating that the
makers must have ascended suddenly. Beside the
last footsteps lay a woman’s shoe, and, nearby, the
fragments of a bottle, with marks where a liquid
had lain before consumption or evaporation. Pick-
ing up the shoe, the magistrate fitted it to the tracks
in the sand, revealing that it was Madame Hou’s
shoe and her footmarks. Observing the base of
the broken bottle, a faint perfume, not unlike rice
wine, could be detected.
“ Having told his assistants to carefully gather
the pieces of broken glass and place all in a bag,
Chang Pu-liang then directed them to search the
top of the yard wall for signs of abrasions by a
rope. He expected to find that a rope had been
stretched across the yard, and was surprised when
the top of the wall was reported as covered with
moss which was unbroken.
“ The yard on the opposite side of the house con-
tained a few vegetables and a double well, with the
usual pole against the eastern wall, from which
was flown a flag with a gold sun, moon and stars
on the early morning of New Year’s Day, to pro-
tect the garden from storms of wind throughout
the year.
“ Inside the house all was in order. Nowhere


could be seen evidence of a struggle; no hiding
place; no sign of disagreement between the couple;
and nothing whatever to show that Hou Tu’s story
was not perfectly true. Nevertheless, the magis-
trate still had doubts, probably because he was a
Confucianist and did not believe in miraculous
ascents to heaven.
“News of the ascent quickly spread, and cus-
tomers were not long in coming for Hou’s elixirs.
He was pressed to sell his secret, but refused be-
cause, he asserted, everyone would then fly off to
heaven and the city remain deserted. Yet, as no one
was reported to have followed his wife, it was not
long before trade again began to decline, and Hou
was compelled to introduce further attractions.
This he was able to do by asserting that his wife
appeared and recounted tales from the upper air,
where she dwelt in happy surroundings.
From day to day Hou took pleasure in repeating
these tales, which grew more and more universal
in their themes until they embraced the spirits of
the universe. His story of the ‘Conclave of the
Great Departed ’ sold a gallon of elixir in a week,
and ran as follows:
“ ‘A meeting of the gods was held in the upper
air to elect a president. They assembled from all
lands of all times. Each advocated claims of
others, holding themselves in contempt. Confucius
praised Lao Tzu, and Buddha extolled Christ,
while Mohammed had a weak spot for Kwan Yin!
Lesser celebrities, including twelve Disciples and
sixteen Arhats, were no less expansive with their
praise of rivals. The debate began to grow a little
heated, when into their midst came a being who
spoke while revolving like a humming top. A


superb head was adorned with two faces, that on
one side being male, and on the other female, and
words issuing at the same instant from two mouths
united in a stream of melody.
‘“I am the Yin and the Yang, and without me
you could not have existed. As the creator of all
life I preside over meetings, whether of the living
or the dead.’
“A hush fell over the assemblage. Then Con
fucius said:
“‘ In life it was my custom to avoid com-
mentaries on the beings whom we do not know.
Nevertheless, I am tempted to ask: Who is the
Supreme Ultimate?’
“And the Yin and the Yang replied:
*“ None of us know. He is supreme. We obey
his thoughts without question because he is
implanted in all of us.’
“ Reports of these stories reached the ears of
Chang Pu-liang, who was convinced of Hou’s guilt,
and sent for him to be examined again. Hou
repeated the tale of his wife’s ascent, which
occurred early in the morning, and that when she
was about a li above the yard the bottle was
dropped. The magistrate examined the broken
glass once more and noted that the thick bottom
had not been broken. Experiments with a bottle
of similar size, let fall from a height, showed that
its heavier end was shattered. Then he recalled
that raindrops on the sand had pattered into the
footprints also, and, sending to the Weather Pro-
phet at the Imperial Observatory, learnt that no
rain fell on that day. On the previous evening,
which was hot, a thunderstorm produced a slight
shower. Therefore, the footprints were made before


the morning at the hour of the Hare. This led to
a further minute search of Hou’s abode, when a
slight smudge of vermilion paint was detected on
the flag pole, which was painted vermilion, corres-
ponding with a smudge on a column by the door-
way.
“ Hou Tu was arrested and obliged to confess.
He had taken the long flag pole and propped it in
the doorway, tying the shaft to the upper portion
of the column, and projecting over the yard. His
wife had then walked under the end of the over-
hanging pole and hauled herself clear of the ground
by a rope which was attached with a pulley, dropping
her shoe in the ascent, while he held the end of
another rope, tied round her waist, with which he
contrived to swing her to the doorway. Then,
having thrown a bottle of elixir onto the spot, he
had fastened a line to the dog’s collar, to which the
rope from the pulley at the end of the pole also was
attached, and when the dog had eaten a morsel
thrown into the yard, he had pulled the animal into
the air and swung it back to the doorway. This was
repeated with each duck in succession, calling them
to an evening meal beneath the flag pole.
“ In the opposite yard were two wells connected
by a pipe drain. Blocking this pipe, the water was
used from one well until almost emptied, when
stones were removed from the side and the bodies
deposited, the stones replaced and cemented. Then
the drain was cleared and the empty well filled up
again, thus hiding any sign of the excavation. It
was sad, declared Hou, to waste such good food,
but eight were too many and the feathers would
have blown about the place.


But what became of your wife and the dog? '
asked the magistrate.
“ ‘ Oh! they went off to a relative’s house,’
replied Hou. ‘lt was not possible to keep them
near at hand.’
“‘Good for good; for evil, justice,’ said Chang
Pu-liang. ‘ You are discharged.’ ”
“Hurry Fifty has surpassed himself,” said
Brighten Airey, and turning to Chih-hu:
“ What is your opinion of the tale?”
Chih replied:
“ is as up-to-date as Peiping, but for Celestion
needs heavy headlines.”
And he relapsed into silence.
Presently, Goodspeed remarked:
Peiping lies in the north, while new creative-
ness is born in the south. it blossoms in the
north the south will be wilting. Peiping has pre-
served the beauty of past ages which the south has
lost. Its beautiful temples show the style of T’ang
days, while pictures and pottery contain whims and
ways long since departed from the scenes of their
birth. To seek the movement which is stirring one
must proceed to the south of the Tang-tsze, where
creativeness is born.”
“You are right,” said Chih-hu. “The omni-
potence of geography cannot be avoided.”
“ Then let us turn south in the morning,” said
Brighten Airey. And they went to bed.


CHAPTER THIRTEEN
WHEREIN A GLIMPSE OF MODERN CHINA IS
REVEALED OVER NANKING AND SHANGHAI,
AND NEARBY, AT HANGCHOW, THE MONASTERY
OF PURE COMPASSION DEALS WITH THAT
WHICH IS EVERLASTING.
aT DAYBREAK the sound of sweet whistling
ii awoke all hands as pigeons flew round the
“ Yin-Yang.” Heaviside was amazed that these
cooing birds uttered musical notes in Peiping, until
Wu told him that wind-whistles of various tones,
attached to their breasts, made music on their
flights.
The “ Yin-Yang ” rose into the morning sky and
sped southwards, while peasants were washing
their vegetables in pools by the roadside which led
past the Temple of Heaven. Chih-hu had recovered
his cheerful smile, and, as they sat down to break-
fast, said;
“ Renor Goodspeed is right. Architecture in
Peiping preserves the spirit of Kang Hsi. Its main
lines repeat the great periods of Chinese archi-
tecture. In the south multitudinous details and
fancy adornments have obscured the greatness of
T’ang days. Presently, Peiping will arise again,
and beauty once more will come from the south.”
As they came on deck from the morning meal,
the Yang-tsze-kiang was flowing like a muddied
sea beneath them, and when Nanking appeared on
the southern shore Chih suggested a pause for a
moment. Brighten Airey swung the plane round
and they poised high over the city.
Figures could be seen emerging from a public


building and running along the street, disappearing
in other buildings, followed by some who appeared
as antagonists. Chih assured them that a change
of government was proceeding.
“ The retiring members are making for their
departmental offices from the House of Parliament,
with their successors swiftly following. They will
appear at the back doors of the departments and
disappear, until to-morrow, when they defeat their
rivals and form a new government again. Nanking
is in the throes of change.”
People flocked from houses and the streets soon
became packed. They had caught sight of the
“ Yin-Yang,” and waved with excited gestures.
“ What makes them so agitated?” said Brighten
Airey.
“ Oh! ” replied Chih, “ they imagine we are the
Phcenix. The Feng bird appears when right is
going to triumph in the world, and the people have
been watching for a long period. The Flowery
Fowl, as it was called by Shun, first presented
itself in his courtyard, and proved a sign of pros-
perity dawning in China. Lieh I, who was a great
painter a couple of hundred years before Christ,
painted superb phoenixes which were more real
than actual birds. The Japanese also have produced
some beautiful renderings of the Ho bird, as they
call the Phoenix. But Nanking was a favoured
spot. The Phoenix Tower once stood nearby where
the bird came to rest and sang so melodiously that
all other birds came to listen. The Phoenix is chief
of three hundred and sixty-five classes of birds, in
European counting of days, and is supreme.”
“ Perhaps,” said Goodspeed, “ we are the Phoenix.
The ‘ Yin-Yang ’ is modelled like a blue Feng bird.”


Proceeding southwards, in a few minutes they
caught sight of thousands of factory chimneys
studded over the landscape, and through the haze
beyond lay Shanghai. One or two of the chimneys
emitted smoke, and here and there stacks were
crashing to the ground.
“ That is where China manufactured most of the
goods with which she swamped the world,” said
Chih. “ Many of the factories were under European
management, and all produced the same articles as
similar institutions in Russia, the United States.
Germany, amongst European states, and Japan. It
was merely a matter of erecting the factory, instal-
ling the machines, and finding the cheapest labour.
Most countries had become so dull that when China
imitated their stupidity, the result was inevitable.
And then mankind collapsed.
“A change in creativeness is now in progress.
Everywhere signs of a new movement are dawning
—a movement in which Celestion has paved the
way.”
“ Do you believe that Shanghai will become the
capital of China? ” asked Brighten Airey.
Chih-hu laughed.
“ We are not without a feeling for beauty,” he
said. “ The capital of China at one time existed
nearby, and in spite of calamities and changes,
Hangchow is still beautiful and may return to its
former greatness. Within a few minutes the city
will be beneath us, lying beside Shosei Lake at the
foot of yonder hills.
“ Hangchow, long ago known as Lin-an, was the
capital of the Southern Sung dynasty, which lasted
about one hundred and fifty years and ended in the


thirteenth century. It was a brilliant capital, a
centre of culture and beauty. Some European
writers have been so enthusiastic about its earlier
glories that they describe, amongst its perfections,
‘ a public hot water supply through lead pipes,’ It
certainly had many beautiful homes and exquisite
gardens, a few of which have survived. However,
the Mongols captured Hangchow and ended its
days as a capital city. Later came the Ming
dynasty, which made Nanking its capital, but failed
to revive Hangchow’s idealism, and Chinese art
declined and has not yet recovered.
“ In Hangchow’s days of greatness, Ma Yuan and
Hsia Kui were famous painters and excelled in
landscape painting because of the beauty of the
city’s setting. Ma Yuan was the greatest, and
painted eight scenes on Shosei Lake which estab-
lished a type for all later Chinese and Japanese
painters. A priest dwelling in Liu T’ung-ssu, a
monastery on the western shore of the lake, whose
name was Mu Ch’i, made the third of Hangchow’s
galaxy of painters. Dragon painting was at its
height in the thirteenth century, when Hangchow
blossomed, and Ch’en Jung became a famous
dragon painter.
“And there below us is the city whose fame as
a capital may yet return,”
Hangchow was bathed in warm morning light.
Its whitewashed walls, large and bare, and some
of faded vermilion, sheltering beneath roofs of
exquisite “ black,” lay beside an opalescent blue
lake, in colour perfect. Across Shosei Lake, little
valleys nestled between steep hills, bordering the
water. Clear sunshine and a wonderful stillness
lay over the landscape. Temples in the valleys,


almost hidden amongst luxuriant trees, showed
black and orange amongst their whites. And
patches of sunlight filtered through bamboos
growing beside the stone-flagged paths which led
through the valleys. Here was the spot where
painters and poets gathered in search of beauty.
They were enchanted as the “ Yin-Yang ” came to
a stop over Shosei Lake.
There, exclaimed Chih-hu, indicating a tiny
valley bordering the lake, “ lies Ching Tzu Szu,
the Monastery of Pure Compassion. On that spot
once dwelt Sha Ho-shang, who was a young man
of attractive appearance and filled with the zest of
life. He aspired to become a great poet but pro-
gress was difficult because his thoughts were car-
ried away by visions of a beautiful girl across the
lake at Hangchow. When he settled down to write
and became immersed in his art, a vision would
arise and lead him across the water. All efforts
to resist were defeated by the workings of Nature,
which were crafty.
The task he was engaged upon was a poem of
the ‘ History of Mankind,’ which, perhaps, shared
the view of the Persian account of the same sub-
ject, and briefly, read: ‘He was born; he suffered;
he died.’ Nevertheless, his trips across Shosei Lake
were not all suffering, and may have been taken to
represent the life of mankind.
Sha Ho-shang rebelled against the lures which
led him across the lake, and one evening, when he
fought against desire and strove to work on his
poem, feeling his mind grow weaker, he implored
assistance from the Madonna of China, the Goddess
of Mercy, Kuan Yin, who appeals to all. Then


calm came over him and he fell asleep. Kuan Yin
had listened to his prayer.
“ When he awoke and looked around, his fur-
nishings appeared hanging on a peg beside the
table, and his mind was free of desire. He was
able to work without distraction, and wrote until
sleep subdued him. Thereafter, no further excite-
ment occurred and a few minutes slumber sufficed
to effect the change. His tranquil mind spread a
beneficent influence, and on his death the Monas-
tery of Pure Compassion was built.
“ In the entrance pavilion, or Guardian Gate, was
placed Pan Ku, Creator of the Universe. He sits
smiling under a canopy, behind a lacquered screen.
Peeping over this screen, one observes Pan Ku
surrounded by the Ch’i-lin, Phoenix, Tortoise, and
Dragon. On his knees he is holding the sun and
the moon, a pair of discs adorned with gold, and
on his brow is a tall Rod of Life. He is a symbol
of creativeness, but made a mistake in not granting
man power to remove his distractions, which
accounts for the emblem on his head, as a reminder
of his error in overlooking pure compassion.
“ In one word, it was the poet’s intention to show
‘ Pure Compassion ’ extended to man, as the
removal of these distractions from the sphere of
Reason. Perhaps, Sha Ho-shang, or Human
Character, was right. Yet even if Reason does not
go hand-in-hand with the Rod of Life, they may
be honourable antagonists.”
“ That is all very well,” said Brighten Airey,
“ but what became of his ‘ History of Mankind?
“Alas! it is not known,” replied Chih. “ Possibly
it joined all other works of man, which were con-
ceived by reason alone, and ended in the dust-bin.


CHAPTER FOURTEEN
WHEREIN TALES OF “ COLOURED CHICKENS”
AND “DANCING FISH” INTRODUCE THE STOP-
SHORT ON THE WAY TO CANTON, WHERE
“PERFECT SINCERITY” REVEALS THE LIMITA-
TIONS OF THOUGHT.
AS THEY sped towards Canton, when Wu Chih
x\ brought morning tea, Brighten Airey suggested
that a tale from him would throw light on the
city of the south.
“ Being a cook,” replied Wu, “my stories are
concerned with meals and the honourable beings,
such as chickens and fish, which adorn them.”
“ Nothing could be more entertaining,” said
Goodspeed. “ Su-su, go the feathers of wild geese,
and your words will be as swift and sure.”
“ ‘ Climbing trees to catch fish ’ is not the pastime
for a superior man,” said Wu, “ but for one like
myself, without the ability of Yi Ya, cook to the
Duke of Ch’i, who had a palate so delicate that he
could distinguish the waters of two rivers, I shall
dare to walk on ‘ spring ice ’ and tell a tale of
coloured chickens.
“ There is a European saying; ‘ Don’t count your
chickens before they are hatched.’ In Canton, the
proverb runs: ‘ Colour your chickens as soon as
they are hatched.’
“ Following this admirable proverb, chickens in
Canton roam the alleys adorned with scarlet combs,
gay feathers, and brilliant colours painted under
their tails, distinguishing them at a glance.
“ Two neighbours, Ho Li and Lo Yu, dwelt side-
by-side in the Street of Small Tranquillity. They
h 113


were friends, and their chickens roamed the streets
together. Ho painted his birds malachite green,
and Lo used vermilion in a circle of lapis blue.
Entering into trade together, at first money came
easily. Then Ho began to lose while Lo added to
his wealth. This continued until Ho chanced upon
a transaction which caused him to suspect Lo, and
he decided on a test.
“Announcing that he was going to Macao to pay
a visit, and disguising himself as a merchant from
Hong Kong, he called on Lo Yu and convinced him
that large profits would arise from the sale of por-
celain fish-tubs in Europe. So attractive did his
proposal become, and so lengthy in discussion, that
Lo was obliged to invite the merchant to dinner.
When roasted chicken was placed on the table, Ho
expressed a liking for the pope’s nose. Examining
under it, on his plate, he found malachite green
adhering to the crackled skin.
“This occurred long ago. The story became a
legend, and in neighbouring temples priests learnt
to colour the shaven tops of their heads—some blue,
some green, and some vermilion. Thus, the true
ones could be distinguished from Heaven by the
colour of their heads, and a saying arose in Canton:
‘ Colour your chickens in the sight of the Lord.’ ”
“ Your tale,” said Brighten Airey, “ is excellent,
except in one particular. Nothing is said of the
retribution which overtook Lo Yu on the discovery
of Ho’s colour.”
“ That,” replied Wu Chih, “is not considered
necessary in China. The stop-short tale takes the
mind to a point where imagination supplies the
finish. Your remark about retribution reveals that


you are aware of the ending. So why load the story
with unnecessary sentences? ”
“ For my part,” said the Master, unconvinced, “ a
tale should conclude with nothing further to be
said.”
“And in China,” said Wu, “ an audience is part
of a tale, which, nerhaps, makes people quicker to
see results.”
“ Your stop-short tale,” remarked Goodspeed,
smiling, “ has a serious defect. It is too short.
Cannot we have another? ”
“ If a tale of fish, following one of chickens, is
agreeable to your palates, there is a Canton story
of ‘ The Gem Spring of Dancing Fish.’
“‘The Temple of the Gem Spring of Dancing
Fish ’ has in the courtyard a pool, fed from a
spring, where purple and green spotted fish dance
in the sunlight. Maidens who seek husbands come
to the ‘ Gem Spring ’ and feed the fish before be-
seeching Kwan Yin to grant their wishes.
“ Long ago, the story which led to the establish-
ment of the Temple was a classic in Canton,
“ Nowadays, the city is much like what it was in
those days. Very narrow streets, paved with large
flat stones, run between buildings, which often are
three or four stories high, and myriads of people
throng them. Everywhere shops are filled with
enormous quantities and wonderful varieties of
foods. There are more foodstuffs and more food-
shops than one would expect to see elsewhere in a
lifetime. Many curio and embroidery establish-
ments also face the streets in their proper quarter,
but few are good. Fish shops are the most
interesting. An abundance of fish of beautiful,
varieties, swim in large dishes with a jet of water


playing on them. All live creatures in China have
great tenacity of life, but in most places a fish taken
from the sea would quickly die. In Canton, they
are placed in fresh water and, indifferent to the fate
which has overtaken them, appear at ease.
“ The hawker of fish goes his rounds carrying
two flat dishes, slung from a bamboo pole, with his
fish swimming in the water.
“At the time of this tale, Ah Cum, a fish hawker,
had a tiny shop in Tai Sun, the main street. He
was ambitious, but poor, and deeply in love with
Su I An, who was the daughter of Sing Ping, a
proud curio merchant, whose consent to their be-
trothal was denied. The lovers, therefore, decided
to win his consent by fair means or foul—or to be
exact, by a fish.
“As Ah Cum went his rounds, he called:
“ ‘ Fish o! fish o! all alive. Red fish, blue fish,
green and spotted; fish o!’
“ His cry was not unlike that of European fish
hawkers.
“Approaching the establishment where his lady
dwelt, Ah Cum caught sight of Sing Ping seated
on the balcony above the street. Su I An had
persuaded him to take the air as, she declared, he
was looking a little overtaxed by his too close
attendance in the curio shop. Sing Ping was a
born gambler, like most Cantonese—and like most
men, readily believed that he needed a rest.
“ Stopping at a neighbour’s house, a few doors
along the street, in response to his call, a basket
was lowered with the price of a fish, which was
hauled up to the window. Ah Cum then came
to the curio shop and put down his dishes under
the balcony. Having made respectful salutations


to the father of Su I An, he pointed to a mag-
nificent red fish which swam in one of his dishes,
and announced that no skilled angler had succeeded
in catching this intelligent fish. Many had tried,
but their skill was not sufficient.
“ Sing Ping was interested, and, his sporting
instincts being aroused, he offered to bet that his
line would catch the red fish, which, he declared,
was really of little value. To this Ah Cum could
not agree because, he said, the guile of the fish,
which was the choicest in the dish, had proved
invincible. Naming twenty dollars as the amount
he would wager against his chance of catching the
fish, Sing Ping was piqued when the offer was still
refused. Ah Cum, however, dwelt on the exceed-
ingly cunning fish, and, while Sing Ping was deter-
mined to catch it, calmly proposed, as a wager, that
if the respected gentleman caught the fish that
would be the end of it. But if he failed, his
daughter would be given in marriage to this totally
unworthy person.
“ ‘ That,’ said he, ‘is between ourselves. The fish
is yours when you catch it.’ Even as he spoke, he
took a hook and bait from the side of the dish and
looked up for a line.
“At that moment Su I An, who had overheard
the conversation from the room behind, came for-
ward with a basket on a rope, and a fishing line.
Before Sing Ping had time to consider the offer,
his daughter placed the rope and line in his hands
and requested a twenty cent piece, which was the
usual amount paid for a catch in the dishes. Sing
looked at Su, but she gave no sign of knowing any-
thing about the offer, and, confident that the big
fish would be caught by his skill, he placed the


twenty cents in the basket and lowered it over the
rail.
“Ah Cum took the line from the basket, but did
not touch the coin. Tying the baited hook on the
line, he said:
“ ‘ Is it a wager? ’
And Sing Ping nodded his head.
“ Meanwhile, passing people stopped and
gathered round. The sight of a customer angling
for a fish never failed to draw a crowd, and they
loved to bet on the result.
“ Sing Ping pulled up his line and deftly dropped
the baited hook into the middle of the dish. The
fish were alarmed, and all hugged the edge. The
crowd surged round, and the big red fish, with blue
eyes fixed on the bait, overcame his nervousness
and edged towards it. Sing swung his hook gently
towards him and the big one philandered with the
bait. A small black-and-gold fish swam alongside
and steadily eyed the floating morsel, while others
formed a circle round it as their fear vanished.
Even money was offered on the black-and-gold, and
bets were made in all directions as gamblers picked
their fancy fish. The noise grew deafening. Excite-
ment increased as the circle narrowed, and the big
red fish was favourite. Then a sudden rush, splash-
ing water, a strike, and a lovely purple fish with
green spots was hoisted into the air. He danced
in the sunlight as Ah Cum removed him from the
hook and placed him in the basket.
“Fish o! fish o!’ he called, as he passed along
the street, and his words were a song of delight.
“ Su I An prayed to Kwan Yin in the room off
the balcony until she heard her father swear. Then
she knew that her prayer had been granted. Taking


the dancing fish from the basket, she placed it in a
bowl of clear water.
“ That evening, on meeting her lover, she told
him that Kwan Yin had listened to her supplica-
tion, and proposed they should take the fish, which
she had kept alive, to the Gem Spring in the valley,
where, under the protection of the Madonna, free-
dom awaited it. Ah Cum agreed, but was secretly
amused. He had taken the precaution of feeding
the big red fish until it could eat no more, before
placing him in the dish for his rounds.”
Brighten Airey waited a moment and added:
“ Then they were married and lived happily ever
afterwards.”
“ Beyond a doubt,” said Goodspeed, “ and in
Canton, which lies ahead.”
The aerodrome was placed on the island of
Shameen, beside the city, where the foreign con-
sulates once were situated. On landing, Chih-hu
made off to look for business, and under the direc-
tion of Wu Chih, the crew sought a restaurant
where the best of dinners was provided.
Canton was not an interesting city. It was filled
with ugly architecture, and the influence of the
West, which had lost itself, still held sway. Never-
theless, the people were further advanced towards
the new creativeness than elsewhere in China.
Russians, under Borodin, groping blindly with
Communist theories from their land, and the dimly
perceived idealism of Sun Yat Sen, had paved the
way. Here and there tentative efforts in literature
showed the dawn of a new era, in which construc-
tiveness, perhaps, would come from the latitude of
Hangchow, although intercourse with Celestion
opened the path. While they listened to Brighten


Airey discoursing on the advantages of modern
flight, and sipping “pear wine” which Wu had
secured on their tour of the town, Chih-hu entered
with a smile which proclaimed some business
accomplished.
“ Thanks to the tale of ‘ Coloured Chickens,’ ” he
said, “ in which Ho Li announced the profits to be
made from porcelain fish tubs, a shipment of excel-
lent tubs with fish swimming round them, modelled
in the new methods of Canton, will be shipped to
Celestion for use in the shops, and in return a gross
of books, describing the discovery and uses of
Yin-Yang, will be accepted. Senor Tortue will be
delighted. He should be as pleased as Ching, had
he lived, to see the awakening of Canton.”
“And who,” said Brighten Airey, “was Ching?”
Chih-hu replied:
“ In Canton, many years ago, dwelt Chao and
Ching, who were great friends. They followed the
art of painting, and were inseparable until obliged
to serve in the north, when their duties took them
different ways. At the end of fifty months both
were invalided home, suffering from exposure.
“ Ching was first to arrive, and immediately
secured silk, inks and brushes to welcome his friend.
Their devotion was reflected in their work. One
always praised pictures by the other. As time went
on. it became evident that both must die, their
complaint proving incurable.
“ One day, Chao said to Ching: ‘ Let us pass our
last days together with perfect sincerity.’
“ ‘ That would be difficult,’ replied Ching, ‘ but
we can try.’
“ Perhaps the shortness of their days, and know-
ledge of their end, may have helped the friends to


maintain their friendship under these trying con-
ditions. Truth was exchanged between them and
their friendship remained unbroken. Towards the
end, when both were dying, Chao asked Ching what
the world thought of his pictures.
“ 4 They will live,’ replied Ching. ‘ And mine? ’
‘“Alas! Yours cannot accompany them.’
“ Chao’s pictures became admired and sought by
collectors, while Ching’s fell into indifferent hands
and remained rolled up. In course of centuries the
silk darkened on Chao’s work, and presently, the
subjects could no longer be seen. Ching’s then
became famous as masterpieces of their time, while
Chao’s were thrown away.
“Of what avail is perfect sincerity? Humanity
is incapable of seeing further than the end of its
nose.”


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
WHEREIN GOLDEN GEESE REVEAL THE CHIEF
ENDS OF MAN, AND MACAO, WHILE RICH IN
ARCHITECTURAL MINGLING, FAILS TO SHOW
SIGNS OF LITERARY CHANGE.
WHEN Chih-hu came on deck as the “Yin-
Yang” turned southwards again, he was in
a cheerful mood. On the telephone, Senor Tortue
had expressed delight with the Canton transactions
and confessed that he did not expect trade until the
awakening of China was past the experimental
stages. The fish troughs, he said, would introduce
beauty into the industry which had lost it, through
the manipulations of people who thought only of
profits. And do not fail to visit Macao, where East
met West with more constructiveness than else-
where in China.
Having set a course for Macao, which was a trifle
east of south, and within twenty minutes of easy
flying, Brighten Airey said to Chih:
“Are you not sad to be leaving China again?”
Not in the least,” replied Chih-hu. “ Celestion
has become a centre from which China and the
world will evolve creative ideas, and, until that
movement progresses, it must remain the starting
point. Moreover, literature, which is the first of
the arts, attracts me, while the mind is free to
dwell on constructive ideas, without distractions,
when soaring in the air.”
“ Perhaps there are towns in China where literary
tastes would have been stimulated.” said Brighten
Airey.
“ There were,” replied Chih. “We might have


landed at Lo-yang, which lies in Honan Fu, a little
south of where we passed from Chang-an to
Peiping. Lo-yang was the capital in the late Han
dynasty, which blossomed a couple of centuries
before Christ, and again in the Liang dynasty of
the tenth century. Like Chang-an, it was a great
capital, with beautiful gardens and museums, and
rejoiced in writers.”
“ Why not tell one of their tales? ” said Good-
speed, who had joined them.
“An old piece of pottery,” said Chih, “in the
window of a curio shop in Canton, was a reminder
of a legend in Lo-yang. It was a figure of an old
warrior with two geese attached, which was the
reverse of ‘ Leda and the Swan,’ and which showed
two geese because of the reasons which the tale,
a variation on ‘ Man’s chief end ’ in European cate-
chism, reveals in Chinese mythology.
“ In the early days of Lo-yang, Hwa Tu, while
a young man, stole the lovely wife of K’ung Chia.
This was recorded as an act of ingratitude, but
really was the outcome of a passion which changed
the warrior to a sublime person, and, maybe, K’ung
Chia was not as upset as many imagined. He may
have suspected that his wife had too much facility
in producing daughters.
“ This act of theft led to contempt for Hwa Tu
because, towards the end of his career as a warrior,
he had become the father of eight daughters and
no sons.
“ Each of his daughters grew surpassingly vir-
tuous in each of the ‘ Eight Great Virtues.’ They
were so perfect that men were afraid to propose
marriage, and all grew to be old maids, when the
fame of their virtues spread over the land.


“ Hwa Tu was not soured by his ill-fortune. He
became gentle and sublime. Being exceedingly
wise, he proclaimed words of wisdom which went
to the hearts of his audience.
“ The Emperor, hearing of his teachings, and of
his eight daughters, when Hwa Tu was old and
failing, and very poor, and being so impressed by
their virtues and the old man’s superior wisdom
and piety, decided to visit and honour him.
“At the moment when the Emperor came to the
gate of the small house where Hwa Tu was lying
in the sunshine by the door, worn out and ready to
die, two Golden Geese flew down and, taking the
old man by the tongue and his emblem of fecundity,
bore him to heaven. These are the chief ends of
man. With the one he utters golden words; with
the other he begets matchless virtues.
“ The Emperor decreed that the eight daughters
should be given a golden goose as an emblem to
wear over each breast, and this became a symbol
of virtue which to this day may be seen on the
people of Celestion.”
“ In my opinion,” said Brighten Airey, “ man is
God’s chief end.”
“ He may be,” said Goodspeed. “ Still, the Shensi
super-germ was in the nature of a warning. We
know that the largest animals disappear soonest.
The dinosaur and the mammoth have gone; the
whale and the elephant are going. Man is growing
larger, and it is noticeable that the smallest men
are the liveliest. The future may be with the tiny
germ when it grows larger. Under particularly
favourable conditions this process can be hastened.
Man, unknowingly, as he is most likely to make a
breeding ground, will aid this growth. Perhaps


the Shensi germ is nothing more than this hastening,
prematurely as it happened. Man must continue
creative, or he will cease to exist. That is the les-
son of the ages.”
“ Which is true enough,” said Chih-hu. “And
here is Macao, where, perhaps, will be shown that
man has not lost his creative gift, which places him
first in the multitudinous workings of the Yin-
Yang.”
Macao was founded by the Portuguese in 1560,
when Portugal led the way round the Cape of Good
Hope and her sailors were brave and adventurous,
marking the course which European civilization
followed until contact with the East and West was
established by sea. The new lands which she dis-
covered and colonized lay in tropical zones, and
slowly their influence sapped her energy away. But
Macao, though occupied by the British early in the
nineteenth century to prevent the French using the
port as a base, remained Portuguese.
From the first inflow of her Western people, the
Chinese set to work to absorb Macao. Even as a
swarm of ants cover or consume a foreign
substance placed on their hill, so the Chinese
instinctively absorb all that settles in their domain.
To-day the absorption is approaching the final
stages. The skeleton of a cathedral, which was
destroyed by fire, stands gaunt and alone in its
European aloofness. It was built too late to con-
tain beautiful Renaissance details, and Chinese
children clamber over the stones, which have be-
come a playground. Administrative buildings, too,
and a few residences, preserve the architecture of
Europe. But in the streets of Macao, where people
swarm, the architecture has absorbed details of


Southern China. Macao is thronged with a popu-
lace who are reverting to their Chinese ancestry
and absorption is irresistible.
Chih-hu and Goodspeed walked through the
town, noting the signs of approaching absorption.
Midway along Cha Hua, or Camellia Street,
a fire had destroyed a building, and the
adjoining side-wall was cracked and tottering.
Builders were erecting poles preparatory to pulling
down the small but alluring establishment beside
the gap. Requesting Goodspeed to contemplate the
beauty of this front, Chih-hu disappeared behind
the screen inside the doorway.
The front was attractive. At the centre rose a
doorway between vermilion columns, attached to
the wall and supporting a porch roof of blue tiles
over an entablature of gay rafters sheltering golden
dragons disporting amongst camellias. Behind the
open doorway stood a screen of dark polished wood
carved with a phoenix ruminating amidst clouds.
On each side of the doorway was a window of
small sashes with gilded sash-bars, enclosed by
carved and gilded supports on which crested waves
rose into cloud scrolls. Open shutters of azure
blue with panels, below the louvres, bearing gay
flowers on a background of gold, completed the
openings. Above were three windows, each shut-
tered and with hinged panels to open, which were
decorated with cloud scrolls and camellias. And
at the sides of the white wall were green downpipes
of clay modelled with the joints of the universal
bamboo. Over all was an eaves, wide and shady,
where dragons and birds disported amongst waves
and a wealth of lovely flowers.
As Goodspeed contemplated the front, he saw


that Europe was the wall with China clambering
over it, and rejoiced in the beauty which resulted.
When Chih, with a smiling face, rejoined him, he
announced that business was concluded. The
builder would demolish the front, taking care of
every part, which then could be shipped to Celes-
tion, and in return had agreed to accept a shipment
of Celestian pillar-boxes, which, all vermilion and
gold, were adorned with tortoises climbing to the
letter-slot, over which gay parrots flew in a panel
of azure blue.
SenorTortue would be charmed with this addi-
tion to the Industrial Arts Museum, of which he
was the president.
“ Let us now proceed,” he said, “ to the agent’s
office of the Small Profits Shipping Company and
consign the shipment to Celestion.”
As they walked to the Bund, Chih-hu became
plunged in gloom.
“What has come over you?” said Goodspeed.
Look, replied Chih, “at those two notices,
side by side, on the wall, proclaiming a competition
between citizens for writing a poem to com-
memorate the founding of Macao. They are printed
the one in Portuguese and the other in Mandarin,
By this time, one would have imagined, a mingling
of languages must have occurred.”
4< “ Do not be impatient,” replied Goodspeed.
“ Literature is commonly supposed to be the first
vehicle of mingling thoughts. It is no such thing.
Architecture precedes it, if only in a primitive way.
When two peoples unite in ideas, then slowly
literature advances. The written word is thought
itself, and thought is the last to change.
Be not distressed. There is ample opportunity


awaiting you to experiment in verse or in prose. And
all that you do will amount to a tiny voice, unheeded
by the wayside. Until Nature works her way.”


CHAPTER SIXTEEN
IN WHICH BINH-DINH PAGODAS LEAD TO A
FLIGHT ALONG THE EQUATOR, AND FULIN AND
FULETTE ARE RECOVERED IN MADAGASCAR
AND TAKEN TO ATHENS, WHERE THE CROCO-
DILE OF EUROPE HAS FLED, AND A RETURN
TO NATURE IS UNDER THE DIRECTION OF
NORTHERN EYES, WHILE NEW CREATIVENESS
CREEPS IN UNSEEN.
MACAO lay between China and Celestion in
more ways than one, and as they proceeded
along the south-west coast, a message came from
Senor Tortue:
“ Monsieur le Comte de Potdechambre is at the
French Consul’s office in Binh-dinh, on the coast
of Annam, and waits an interview. He will explain
his wishes, and terms are to be concluded on the
spot.”
Binh-dinh being only about eight hundred miles
from Macao, the “Yin-Yang” landed at four
o’clock and Chih-hu walked along the Bund, which
was thronged with small people, until he came to
the French Consulate. Here he sent in his name as
Comprador of the “ Yin-Yang,” and was received
in the Consul’s office.
M. le Comte de Potdechambre was attached to
the Consulate and had heard of the plane’s rapid
flights. Senor Tortue had expressed a desire to be
of assistance, and now he ventured to propose a
small journey. Before proceeding to discuss the
flight, perhaps it would be better to retire to a
pagoda of the Consulate, where they could talk
without interruption. Whereupon he led the way
i 129


to a pagoda which stood in the midst of a luxuriant
garden.
It was an attractive structure with a roof of green
tiles surmounted by a golden phoenix. A balcony
floor was placed at the top with openings on four
sides, and the pagoda could not have been more
than forty-five feet high.
Climbing the bamboo stairs, they entered the
balcony room, where refreshments were placed on
a table at the centre, with easy chairs around.
“ Pray be seated,” said M. le Comte, stopping at
the doorway to turn a large revolving handle which
lifted the bottom flight of stairs, and so made the
pagoda-room exceedingly private. Chih looked out
and saw pagodas in all the gardens behind the
buildings on the Bund.
“ It is the custom to have business pagodas in
Binh-dinh, for air as well as privacy,” said M. le
Comte, inviting Chih to try Annamese pear wine.
“ Monsieur le Comte wishes to avail himself of
our poor services,” said Chih.
“ Yes,” replied M. le Comte, “ there are goods in
Madagascar which require to be moved to Athens.”
“ Then why not rely on a ship,” said Chih, “ since
the island is a possession of your country.”
“ Because the goods have to be collected, and
your “Yin-Yang” is admirably suited for this
purpose.
Be assured,” he added, “ that there is nothing
which is not entirely honourable in the transaction,
but secrecy is essential, until sure of success. If
we could agree on the transportation of these goods,
with myself as passenger, from Madagascar to
Athens, we might then arrange on what terms.”
“ That would depend on the weight,” said Chih.


“ Oh! they might amount to a ton, perhaps two.
Certainly not more.”
“And are they dangerous goods?” asked the
Comprador.
“ Not in the least. At present they have neither
sense nor smell.”
“ Then,” said Chih, “if Monsieur le Comte is
agreeable, the ‘Yin-Yang’ would move these
goods from Madagascar to Athens in exchange for
six pagodas of the some design as this one, with
bamboo stairs and all complete, to be landed at
Celestion without charges.”
“ What! Six pagodas! ” exclaimed M. le Comte.
“ It is too much.”
At the end of an hour satisfaction was reached
with four pagodas, which were to be shipped to
Celestion without delay. Chih knew that the
Binh-dinh pagodas would be popular in Celestion
as retreats for lovers in the Delicias Gardens, where
they could pull-up the stairs and commune with the
stars.
Arranging to depart forthwith, Chih returned and
told Brighten Airey and Goodspeed about the pro-
jected flight.
“ It will enable a test of speed over the Equator,”
said Goodspeed, and, with the Master, went to make
preparations. Meanwhile, Wu secured chickens
and fruits, and bamboo shoots for Chang.
Presently, M. le Comte appeared, followed by
coolies bearing a bale of cotton wool, grappling
irons, a bamboo pole, rope, and his bags. At six
o’clock the “ Yin-Yang ” rose and proceeded south-
west to the Equator, which, on their course, lay
sixteen hundred miles away and should be reached
by eight.


“ Then,” said Brighten Airey, “ the Equator will
be followed across the Indian Ocean at a speed of
one thousand miles an hour. To go much faster,
according to the Engineer, would be to court dis-
aster. A swerve would send the blood in our heads
to one side and we should cease to exist.”
“ That would be a pity,” said M. le Comte.
“At any rate,” replied the Master, “ we must leave
Monsieur le Comte to dine without us, and Chih
will attend to your requirements.”
“As we are comrades in this adventure,” said
M. le Comte, “ might I ask that you call me
‘Jerry.’ ”
“ We shall be delighted,” said Brighten Airey,
retiring to the wheel-room.
Through dinner Jerry spoke of his plans. He
had been attached to the French Consulate in
Madagascar, and explored the northern portion of
the island, being interested in tracing remains of
the great bird which once inhabited this spot. The
Aepyornis Titan had a thigh-bone six feet in height
and was, probably, seven metres tall. Eggs and
bones are deposited in the Natural History
Museums of London and Paris, the eggs being
three feet six inches in circumference, and two feet
six inches in diameter. Known by the name of the
“ Roc ” in Sinbad the Sailor’s story, which was that
of Soleyman, an Arab merchant, the tale delighted
Moslem ears in the ninth and tenth centuries. The
bird was supposed to have become extinct about
the eighteenth century. This time, however, is a
mere guess. It may have been earlier, or later.
A friend of Jerry’s, Ambodimadiro, a native of
the island, led him to Amber Mountain in the
extreme north of Madagascar. Here on the side of


the mountain, which is a quiet volcano, was a
small crater filled with warm mud. Ambo declared
that this crater contained many eggs of the giant
bird, as was known to his people for generations
past. The birds had chosen this spot to lay, be-
cause, being communal layers, it then contained
warm and shallow mud which hatched the eggs.
A volcanic disturbance, however, deepened the
mud, which may have become cooler, and preserved
the contents.
Being too sticky to bear weight, and too dense
to allow water or air to penetrate, an egg was
recovered by probing around the edge. This egg
was neither fresh nor bad. The mud had preserved
it, although its proximity to the edge had allowed
the contents to become more or less liquefied. To-
wards the centre of the pool, according to Ambo,
eggs would be perfectly good as the mud formed
an impenetrable mass around them and preserved
from decay. Some day, he said, the mud would be
heated again and the eggs hatched.
“ There was no way,” said Jerry, “by which
these eggs could be gathered, and, soon afterwards,
a transfer to Binh-dinh was arranged. Then, when
listening to beam-news from Celestion, mention
was made of the ‘ Yin-Yang,’and a telephone con-
versation with Senor Tortue resulted in this
journey to Madagascar to try our luck. With this
machine, it should be possible to hover over the
centre of the crater, close to the mud, and so
extract fresh eggs as laid by the Titans.”
“And what will you do with them if we are
successful?” said Chih.
“Ah! I will tell you to-morrow,” said Jerry,
“ when we have the eggs.”


Brighten Airey entered the saloon and announced
that two thousand five hundred and sixty miles of
the circumference of the earth at the Equator had
been traversed in two-and-a-half hours without the
slightest difficulty.
“ It should be possible, then,” said Jerry, “ to cir-
cumnavigate the earth in less than twenty-four
hours.”
“ Easily,” replied the Master. “ But would it be
worth while? We are now proceeding south-west
again, at an easier pace, and expect to sight Mada-
gascar soon after daylight.”
Sunrise revealed to Honeybunn, who was on
watch, Amber Mountain rising above morning
mists. After breakfast, under Jerry’s direction, a
course was steered round the mountain, and all
were eager about the Titans’ eggs. Foothills
stretched to the sea, and on the eastern slope, Jerry
pointed to a hollow filled with mud, which he
described as the exact spot. They descended and
saw it was a small crater overlooking a flat plain
which extended to the sea. A basin of mud, like
a large saucer with a rim of volcanic rock, was
broken here and there with small mounds. The
mud appeared to be very sticky and impervious to
rain, and exhaled a film of vapour. Evidently it
was warmed by subterranean heat, and Jerry
declared a greater amount of heat was rising than
when he came with Ambodimadiro.
“Mon Dieu!” he cried, “we must be quick.”
The “ Yin-Yang ” descended over the centre of
the mud pool, which now was seen to be slightly
bubbling in a few places. A rope ladder was
thrown over the side and Jerry, clad in overalls,
with a line round his body, and grappling irons


attached to a rope which he held, and with his
bamboo stick, carefully prodded the mud. Sig-
nalling to move ahead a little, he pushed his bam-
boo into one of the small mounds and yelled:
“The Titan!”
A bird’s head and neck appeared, and its body
heaved beneath the mud. Quickly Jerry passed the
grappling hook beneath the bird and, making fast
with his rope, waved his arm to heave up. As
the Titan was hoisted aboard, mud and remnants
of egg-shell were scattered in all directions. But
Jerry was too excited to mind trifles, and called
for the ropes again, while Chih directed Hurry and
Homblower to place the chick on the cotton-wool
which was spread on the deck.
Another bird was found under a mound and
uttered notes which resembled musical motor-horns
as it was secured from the heaving mud, and while
this was placed alongside the first no sound came
from Jerry. Chih looked down and saw him hang-
ing from his line. He was insensible. And the
mud was beginning to bubble ominously.
While they hauled Jerry aboard, the “Yin-Yang ”
rose slowly and cleared the danger zone.
“ We were just in time,” said Goodspeed, who
had been tending his engines, not daring to take
risks in the critical position over the mud crater,
which was now emitting puffs of steam.
Wu brought stimulant, which Goodspeed gave to
Jerry, who lay on the deck and soon regained
consciousness.
“Pah!” he exclaimed, “ the air was too hot.”
The two chickens were sitting on the cotton-
wool, and Wu, making a clucking noise, fastened


them with a line by a leg to a ring. At once they
seemed to recognise the Rose Master.
“ Tchuk-tchuk,” he clucked, and the taller bird
stood shakily on its feet.
“He is the gentleman bird,” said Wu. “ The
other is a lady.”
“ Then,” said Jerry, who had sat up, “ we shall
call them Fulin and Fulette.”
Chih brought an easy chair, and with Goodspeed
helped Jerry into it and told him to rest awhile.
Meantime, Wu proceeded to clean the chickens,
and presently they emerged as a handsome pair.
Fulin was slightly larger than Fulette, and stood
four feet six inches to the top of his head. Both
were covered with yellow down and appeared not
unlike large ostrich chicks.
“The miracle of the Madagascar eggs,” said
Jerry, “ was caused by a delay of time. They were
lying for a century, perhaps more, or less, before
hatching, being preserved by the sticky mud. The
temperature of this mud must have remained at an
even heat until shortly before our arrival, when an
increase, caused by subterranean movement,
hatched the eggs. It is reported that wheat, buried
in Egyptian tombs and Indian caves, germinates
after centuries, so the Madagascar eggs were
merely an unusual prolongation of time.”
“And now what shall be done with the birds? ”
said Brighten Airey.
“ If you would proceed slowly to Athens,” replied
Jerry, “ landing on the Acropolis at ten o’clock in
the morning, I could then be assured that Fulin
and Fulette will be ready to assist with the
re-awakening of Europe.”
Through the heat of the day, the “Yin-Yang”


flew slowly north, and towards evening was over
the Red Sea. The chickens, requiring to be kept
in a warm, low altitude, made the cooler evening
welcome, and Wu released the birds and taught
them to walk side-by-side. Chang, the elephant,
after extending his trunk to Fulin and receiving a
peck, would not take further interest in the pair;
evidently elephants and Titans were aloof to each
other.
As they sat watching Wu and the birds, Good-
speed remarked that perhaps Europe would not be
ready to receive Fulin and Fulette.
“ Has the European crocodile had its fill? ” he
asked Jerry.
“ The European crocodile! ” exclaimed the
Frenchman. “We have no crocodiles in Europe.”
“ Oh, yes! you have,” said Goodspeed. “ Perhaps
Chih-hu will tell about the reptile which dwelt in
China.”
“ That was long ago,” said Chih, “ when croco-
diles were numerous.”
“ Three farmers, Chu, Chi, and Lu, had adjoining
farms by the side of a stream in which dwelt a
crocodile. Each was jealous of the other and
envied his lands. Squabbles and disagreements
caused trouble between them.
** Chi and Lu were enthusiastic fishermen, while
Chu loved to sit by the stream and meditate with-
out a line. Each had a favourite spot, and the
crocodile watched from the mud.
44 Chu knew the spots where Chi and Lu fished
and conceived the idea of getting rid of them. On
a dark night he went and hollowed out the bank
where Chi sat over the water. Then Chi came to


fish and the bank collapsed. Chi was eaten by the
crocodile.
“ Not long after, Lu disappeared in the same
way.
“ Thereupon, Chu contrived to get possession of
their lands and became rich. But alone, he was
morose and took to wine. Having no one to drink
or to quarrel with, and nothing to covet, he sat by
the stream all day, watched by the crocodile. Some-
times he called on the departed spirits of Chi and
Lu to return. But nothing came.
“ Thus seated, one day he drank wine and fell
asleep, and in his sleep the crocodile crawled up
the bank and dragged Chu into the mud. Then only
the crocodile remained.
“ That is the history of the states of Chu, Chi
and Lu. Modern Europe was like the neighbours
of Chu, with militarism for its crocodile.”
“ What you say is true enough,” said Jerry, “ but
Europe has passed through its crocodile days and
now is engaged in welcoming a return to Nature.
Following the advice of Monsieur Rousseau, of the
eighteenth century, in France, it has declared in
favour of simple ways, and in Athens a new era is
arising with Nature as the goal. This movement
will be stimulated by the addition of Nature’s
greatest achievement in the way of birds. But you
will see for yourself on the Acropolis in Athens.”
On the telephone that night, Jerry called the
Secretary to the Department of France in Athens,
acquainting him with his offering of Fulin and
Fulette, and arranged to land on the Acropolis at
ten o’clock in the morning.
At daybreak the “ Yin-Yang ” passed the Suez
Canal, and all hands laid out shore clothes to don


In Europe. Jerry and Wu brushed and prepared
the birds, who were now eager and curious about
the world. Wu fed them with a dish he prepared,
and speedily taught circumspect manners in that
queer way he had with animals and birds.
After breakfast, all lined up for the Master’s
inspection. It was arranged that Monsieur le
Comte would lead, with Wu Chih following in
charge of Fulin and Fulette. Then Brighten Airey
and Goodspeed, attended by Honeybunn, Heaviside,
Hurry Fifty and Hornblower, with Chih-hu and
Chang Li Heng bringing up the rear. The men
from Celestion were curious to see the new move-
ment in Europe.
It was a lovely morning as the “ Yin-Yang ”
came in sight of the Piraeo, which was packed with
ships, and all Athens was agog with life. Philo-
sophers were addressing small crowds from the
steps of the Thesion, and everywhere people moved
with energetic strides about their tasks. Up the
roadway to the Propylaea, at the entrance of the
Acropolis, a procession moved on foot. All the
nations of Europe were represented. They were
clad in scarlet smocks, adorned with the swastika
in gold, white trousers, glossy black Russian boots,
and tall conical, white hats with a peacock feather
reared up behind and tipping over the peak.
The Acropolis was a gay sight. Crowds of
people moved about the rows of stalls where all
manner of goods and eatables were on sale, and all
made by hand in accordance with Nature. Against
the new balustrades, at the edge of the Acropolis,
a path was left vacant where guides escorted
visitors, mounted on white donkeys, and pointed
out the attractions of Athens.


Above the throng rose the Parthenon, restored
in all its glory and colour, proclaiming that Europe
was re-learning its architecture. The sculpture
from the frieze had been returned from museums
in northern Europe, and where damaged or missing,
restorations filled the gaps. The Gateway, or Pro-
pylaea, also was restored, and the small Temple of
Nike, opposite the Parthenon, had become the
scene of statesmen’s lectures. On the northern
side, a scaffolding hid the Erechtheion, which was
being restored, and from a magnificent flag-pole
between it and the Parthenon floated a great silk
flag of scarlet adorned with a golden swastika.
The Yin-Yang” descended on the landing
ground at the north-east corner of the Acropolis,
and Brighten Airey, having presented his creden-
tials and appointed a guard for the plane, received
the Secretary to the Department of France, who
came to welcome M. Ie Comte, and the party moved
off to intercept the official gathering on the way to
the Parthenon. As they went through the crowd,
Fulin and Fulette were regarded with curiosity.
They followed Wu, stepping side-by-side, and the
hard red knob on their heads was held erect as
though they knew what was expected of them.
Around their necks Jerry had tied a red silk scarf,
adorned with the swastika, and with their yellow
down they looked an unusual pair.
“ Lo °k you! ” said a citizen, “ even the birds are
coming to rejoice in our return to Nature, to say
nothing of the elephant.”
“ Ma 7 they get more out of it than I do,” replied
an old Athenian.
The party, followed by a few idlers, made their


way to the front of the Parthenon, where they
waited to intercept the official throng.
Presently, the music of reed pipes announced the
coming of a procession which wended its way from
the Propylasa, and at the threshold of the steps in
front of the Parthenon, the First Consul for France
spoke to the Grand Director, who paused at the
step.
The Grand Director was a gorgeous person.
Attired in a red silk smock with a golden swastika
on the front and the back like every other citizen
of official standing, his head, beneath a white
conical hat with nodding feather, was adorned
with a golden beard dressed in the ancient
Assyrian fashion, while his arms were encircled
with bands of gold with crests designating the posi-
tions he filled.
What is it? ” he asked, and his blue eyes were
not unkindly. Whereupon the First Consul
beckoned to Jerry and the party to approach.
“ This,” he said, “ is Monsieur le Comte de Potde-
chambre, who has succeeded in bringing to the
glory of Athens a pair of Aepyornis Titans from
Madagascar, which will shortly grow at least forty
metres high, and which can be usefully employed
in drawing chariots round the Acropolis to show
distinguished visitors the miracles of beauty rising
in our capital of Europe,”
“ They should prove an interesting addition to
our attractions which have Nature as their guide,”
said the Grand Director. “ But Monsieur le Comte,”
he added, “it would be as well to consult the
First Ornithologist regarding the rearing of these
chickens of yours, which I hope to see on parade
before very long.


“And who are his companions?” he said to the
First Consul, nodding at the crew of the “ Yin-
Yang.”
“ Oh! they are from Celestion, being in charge
of the aeroplane which brought the birds,” replied
the First Consul. “Ah! Celestion! That is in the
East, where the benefits of our system are slow in
appearing. Never mind! ” he added, addressing the
group, “ take note of what you see, and presently
your country will begin to perceive the glory of the
United States of Europe.”
Then the Grand Director, followed by the throng,
passed up the steps and entered the Parthenon.
Meanwhile, the First Ornithologist, who was a
genial Austrian, approached and became excited
when he examined Fulin and Fulette and heard
their story.
“ Why,” he said, “ these are the most dis-
tinguished visitors who have come to Europe. You
must be careful with them. Athens will be too cold
for a start. Better to take them to Fiume Freddo,
in Sicily, where under the shelter of Etna they will
receive warmth. There my old friend, Signor
Uccello, who was an ornithologist, will be able to
assist with advice, should it become necessary. And
no time should be lost in getting the birds settled.
I will send an introduction immediately to your
aeroplane.”
‘ Perhaps,” said Jerry, as they returned to the
Yin-Yang,” “ you would like to see more of the
wonders of Athens? ”
Goodspeed looked at Chih-hu, and with a smile
said:


“Would the marvels of Athens compensate for
for the loss of Fulin and Fulette? ”
“ Maybe,” replied Chih, “ the crocodile of Europe
has swallowed more than the Grand Director per-
ceives.”
Jerry was feeding Fulin and Fulette, and Wu
had gone below to get refreshments, when Chang
emitted a shrill trumpet, waving his trunk at
Pi Po’s box. To their consternation the box was
empty. Pi Po had gone. A quick search failed
to reveal the opossum. Wu, returning with a tray
and glasses, smiled at their alarm and said he would
find him. He made off towards the south-east
corner of the Acropolis, behind the Parthenon,
and in a row of small eucalyptus trees he soon
found Pi Po eating his fill. Tucking the truant
under his arm, Wu placed the opossum in his box
again.
Waiting for the letter from the First Ornitholo-
gist was growing a little tedious, when Brighten
Airey said:
“ Without wishing to appear critical, what is all
this rigmarole in Athens about? Why do they
rebuild old temples and make a fuss about Nature?”
Instantly Jerry replied:
“ Europe has returned to the simplicity of Nature
and is rebuilding civilization on a basis of truth.”
“ What new truth is revealed on the Acropolis? ”
asked Brighten Airey.
“A great new era is dawning. Presently it will
shine clear,” replied Jerry.
Well! said the Master, “ there is no evidence
of its coming, so far as one can see.”
“Nevertheless there may be,” said Goodspeed.
At that moment, Edipus, the guard, came in with


the letter from the First Ornithologist. He was
an old Athenian. Having accepted a glass of
Binh-dinh pear wine, he looked about him when
Goodspeed asked what his ideas on the new era in
Athens amounted to.
“ Not much! ”he said. “ I have to keep my job
and must be cautious. But for my daughter’s two
youngsters, life would not be worth living. Tais
is the wife of a big German tiler who has the brains
of a donkey. Carl, my son-in-law, says that Juno,
his boss, has a shipment of blue tiles from Celes-
tion, which are to replace the roof of the Parthenon.
Celestion must be an agreeable city. Is it not? ”
“ Not so bad,” said Goodspeed, “Of course, it
cannot compare with Athens.”
“ Naturally,” replied Edipus. “Athens is the
founder and the saviour of Europe.”
When the old man had retired, Goodspeed said:
“ There you have the unconscious movement
which is at work. Without being aware of it,
creative influence is spreading from China, through
Celestion, and ere long Europe will be implanting
her ways and thoughts on material gathered from
the South. Already the Grand Director takes a
pride in the accomplishments of Athens, and,
unbeknown to him, the movement will progress
without his perceiving what it is all about. His
energy will stimulate the Athenian brain.
“ In short, the eucalyptus which Pi Po found is
a symbol of the movement to follow, a movement
of which we are part, and towards which our task
is to prepare the way, whether blindly or clearly,
according to the will of the Supreme Ultimate.”


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
WHEREIN FULIN AND FULETTE ARE LEFT IN
SICILY UNDER THE PROTECTION OF ST. UOVO,
AND SPAIN REVEALS A SIMILARITY WITH CHINA
IN TALES OF VILLAJOYOSA.
HALF an hour’s flight sufficed for the “ Yin-
Yang ” to reach Fiume Freddo, on the coast
of Sicily, between Catania and Messina. Etna,
reared above, was cloaked in cloud and smoke.
Landing in the Piazza Pollastro, or Place of the
Chicken, on the side of the mountain, Jerry asked
for Signor Uccello.
“ That is my name,” replied an old man, with
a quick, bird-like smile.
“Pardon, Signor!” said Jerry, presenting his
letter from the First Ornithologist.
Signor Uccello became excited as he read the
message.
“ Take me to Fulin and Fulette,” he cried. “All
birds are dear to me.”
And when Wu paraded the two chickens his
enthusiasm could not be controlled.
“ I have the very spot to rear them,” he declared.
“ Come and see for yourselves.”
Jerry, Brighten Airey, Goodspeed, Chih, and Wu
leading Fulin and Fulette, followed Signor Uccello
to his house on the Corso Chimerico. At the back
of this house was a pleasant sunlit yard bounded
by a high and sunny wall. Nothing better could
be desired.
The old man insisted on Monsieur le Comte de
Potdechambre staying with Fulin and Fulette as
his guests, and all wished M. le Comte success.
j 145


Only Wu could not utter a word, being too dis-
tressed at the parting.
Having escorted Jerry to his quarters, Signor
Uccello insisted on seeing the “ Yin-Yang ” leave.
As they returned to the Piazza Pollastro he dis-
coursed on the village.
“ It is called Fiume Freddo, or Cold Fire, because
lava from Etna usually cools before reaching the
outskirts. The climate is warm and suits birds, as
you may guess from the name given to the Piazza
of the Chicken, or Pollastro,”
Amongst a group of fowls, led by a white
Leghorn cock of superb shape and symmetry, at
the centre of the Piazza was a statue of St, Uovo,
a little girl with a crown on her head, holding an
egg and standing on a dolphin.
“ Listen!” said Signor Uccello.
The sound of softly falling fruit came from the
sunny side of the square. An enormous grape
twisted on the wall, and in the leafy vine were
thousands of egg shells, some broken and others
with large holes where chickens had emerged.
“ St. Uovo first taught hens to lay amidst the
branches of the vine, and the warm sun hatched
the eggs. Thus the hens found more leisure to pro-
duce instead of sitting on their nests, and added
to the prosperity of Sicily. The statue was erected
to her memory.
“Fowls are the most beautiful of birds, and Fulin
and Fulette, being of that order, will receive the
protection of St. Uovo.
“In Sicily and southern Italy,” continued the
old man, as they passed a milkman milking a cow
at a doorway on the Piazza, “ it is the custom to
fill the jug with the buyer watching. Sometimes


the milkman has a bladder filled with water con-
cealed under his coat and with a tube to his fingers.
If not closely watched he mixes water with the milk
from the cow’s udder.”
“ East and West are not unlike,” said Chih. “In
Macao the milk vendor has a bladder of water,
whitened to look like milk, and a little sweetened,
which he ejects into the bowl without any milk.
Hence the buyer insists on his milking with thumb
and one finger. With two fingers the bladder sup-
plies the milk. So it is said that two-finger
generosity is no gift at all, being all water and no
milk.”
“ Birds are more honourable,” said Signor
Uccello, as they boarded the “ Yin-Yang.”
“ Nevertheless, be careful,” said Brighten Airey,
“ or one of these mornings Fulin may steal you
through a window.”
“ I shall take care, A rive-derci, Signori! ”
As they rose, Chih called Senor Tortue on the
telephone and reported having left Fulin and
Fulette at Fiume Freddo.
“ It is now proposed to fly to Spain, the Senor’s
land.”
“ Fly due west,” said Senor Tortue, “ and you will
come to a town dear to my heart—Villa joyosa, in
Valencia. Ask for the Senor d’Escargot and tell
him you come from me with this message: * Celes-
tion presents her compliments, and suggests an
exchange of seeds of Valencia oranges, which per-
fume Spain, for red camellias with the loveliest
scent in the East. Fruit for flowers! An exchange
of joys of the earth! * ”
Brighten Airey set the course and joined the
group on deck where, as the coast of Spain


appeared after a flight of an hour, Goodspeed said:
“ Of European peoples the Spaniard is most like
the Chinese. He is closer to nature than the
French, Italians, or English, and is also more
primitive. Bull fighting is evidence of his nearness
to nature, and so is his indifference to the suffering
of horses and men. He is in harmony with animals
and insects, as are the Chinese. When an ass
ascends a steep hill and its master twists its tail,
the animals will proceed at the slowest walk. No
beating has any effect. The two are in agreement.”
On alighting at Villajoyosa, on the coast near
Alicante, in Valencia, Chih went to find Senor
d’Escargot, In a little house with a green door,
and windows with wrought iron grilles, on the
Promenade de la Glorieta, he found the Senor sit-
ting in his courtyard amongst orange trees beside
a fountain pool.
Senor d’Escargot was delighted to hear from
Senor Tortue. Their ancestors were known as the
Snail and the Tortoise, or Caution and Wisdom,
and worked together. The old man expressed his
pleasure in making the exchange and brought a
bag of seed gathered from his own oranges. And
when the Comprador proposed that he should dine
on the “ Yin-Yang ” the Senor protested that the
Captain and Chih should honour his house. But
Chih convinced him that all on the plane looked
forward to his coming and hearing tales of Villa-
joyosa.
After dinner that night, Senor d’Escargot found
the pear wine agreeable, though potent, and in
response to Brighten Airey, told this tale:
“ It was in the fourteenth century that St. Lana,
Patron Saint of Insects, converted the fleas to


Christianity and made the arrangement whereby
their night work is still limited in Villajoyosa. His
address is preserved in the Church of San Perra
Chica, and runs as follows:
O Fleas! Thou art astray in Villajoyosa which
our Father in Heaven has confided to my care. By
disturbing the peace of His people and devouring
their tender parts at all hours, in order to fatten
thyselves and reproduce thy kind, thou art chal-
lenging Him to a conflict of nail to nail. And I,
though of portly frame, am I to close my eyes and
yield before a flea? No! I am the guardian of this
place and I would scorn to decline thy challenge
even though it cost me my sleep. In virtue of my
calling, bestowed by the Grace of God, I am bound
to give warning. And thou, O Fleas! if you are
agreeable, will pay heed to my words: There before
thee lie the broad beds, the domain alike of the
sinner and the flea. Go! and hide in peace. But
come forth only at the hour which heralds the
dawn, when sleep is soundest.’
“At three in the morning, when men sleep sound,
the fleas emerge and feast until four, when they
retire. During this hour no good Christian strikes
a light, observing, on his part, the compact made
by St. Lana with the fleas.
“ With the introduction of electric lighting into
Villajoyosa, the enthusiasm for the Church declined
and the light was switched on by sinners between
three and four in the morning. This led to heresy
amongst the fleas, and numbers began to prey
during the whole night. The concern of the Church
became such that the town council was threatened
and a by-law was passed commanding the lighting
to be cut off between the hours of three and four.


Thereupon the fleas returned to the fold and Villa-
joyosa rejoiced again in the bosom of the Church.”
“ Stories in Spain,” said Goodspeed, “at times
are not unlike those in China. St. Lana’s address
to the fleas is curiously like Han Yu’s ultimatum
to a crocodile which played havoc in his district,
and fled when his lines were cast into the river.
As a poet, statesman and philosopher, Han Yu is
one of the most venerated names in Chinese liter-
ature, which always shows reverence for scholar-
ship.”
“ Could you tell us, Senor d’Escargot,” said
Brighten Airey, “ how comes the word ‘ Viva ’ to
be shaved on the rumps of mules, as we saw in
Villajoyosa to-day?”
“At the time of the re-conquest of Spain,” replied
the old man, “ when the Moors were driven out,
very little agriculture was carried on in the south.
It was no use growing crops. If the Moors did
not take them the Christian soldiers did. Conse-
quently, the brown hills of Spain were browner
than ever, and green food for asses was very dear
and difficult to obtain. These poor beasts suffered
from constipation and the mortality became alarm-
ing. The time came when it was something of an
event to see an ass pass a free motion in the streets
of Villajoyosa. To encourage constipated mules,
when the animal held up its tail the people shouted
‘Viva! Viva!’ and the mule made greater efforts.
It was a symbol for green crops and more peaceful
days in store.
“ Then the original meaning was lost sight of
and when the mule cocked his tail the people cried
‘ Viva ’ to cheer themselves. An enterprising barber
began clipping the word instead of depending on


the crowd for encouragement. Nowadays only
‘ Viva ’ is left on the rumps of mules and the people
have no heart to cheer at the sight of anything
cocked. That is the origin of the word, which is
rarely seen since motors came to Spain.”
“The words‘Viva! Viva!’” said Chih, “ are a
reminder of a story told in Peiping called ‘ Great
Encouragement.’ It serves to show the reverence
for scholarship, which was mentioned just now.
“ Two friends, the one a student and the other a
potter, sat for the examination in Peiping. Both
failed. The potter despaired, but urged the student
to try again. He toiled for both and encouraged
his friend to persevere. After eight trials the
student passed the first degree. At forty years of
age he passed the second. The student wished to
abandon the task, but the potter begged him to
continue and pass the final. At sixty he failed;
at ninety he passed, the thesis for the examination
being the History of Mankind.
All this time the potter, who was poor, sup-
ported the student and met him as he came from
the Examination Hall. Embracing him after pass-
ing the last examination, he collapsed. He had
spent all in sustaining his friend. Dying, he asked
the student what was his version of the History
of Mankind. The student answered: ‘Yours is the
History of Mankind, which is friendship. All else
disappears.’ ”
“ O ur stories are more primitive than yours,”
said Senor d’Escargot, “ perhaps because China has
greater past.
“ In Villajoyosa religion is still the great passion
of the people. The Church of San Perra Chica has
the Chapel of San Perra Chica de Los, or Little


Dog of the Grapes. The custom of eating twelve
grapes on the strokes of midnight at New Year’s
Eve originated in Villajoyosa. Grapes were pre-
served in sawdust for the occasion, when the Bishop
blessed bunches of twelve which then contained the
blood of twelve Apostles.
“ Everyone assembled in the Church, ready for
the hour of midnight, with bunches of twelve
grapes. At the first stroke they uttered the name
of an Apostle and swallowed a grape, skin and all,
and were ready for the next with the following
stroke. It was quick work. The Apostles were
named in this order: Simon Peter, Andrew, James,
John, Philip, Bartholomew, Matthew, Thomas.
James, Jude, Simon, and Judas Iscariot, the sixth
and the last requiring greater speed and breath to
be swallowed in time. All who succeeded in pro-
nouncing these names and swallowing a grape to
each stroke of the bell were assured of happiness in
the following twelve months.
“At this ceremony it was the custom of the Lord
of Villajoyosa to take part, and his successful swal-
lowing brought good fortune to the town for the
ensuing year, or bad if he failed. It became a
tradition of the family to swallow the grapes, and
heirs were carefully trained to ensure that failure
would not occur.
“ Towards the end of the tenth century, Villa-
joyosa was besieged by the Moors and was in great
peril. The people were gathered within the walls
and resisted all attacks. When Christmas came,
food was getting short and surrender seemed
inevitable. The Lord of Villajoyosa had died from
wounds received early in the siege, and his place
as leader was filled by his lady, the Dona


d’Estrella Perra Grande, or the Lady of the Big
Dog Star, who directed the defence.
“ When New Year’s Eve arrived, all except the
men on guard at the walls gathered in the Church.
It was a cold night; the Moors outside were shiv-
ering, In the Church everyone was sad and uneasy.
Unspoken anxiety about the swallowing of the
grapes showed in all eyes. The Dona d’Estrella
was to perform the ceremony for Villajoyosa, and
she was a novice to the ordeal. Nobody doubted
that if she failed they were doomed.
“ The Bishop blessed the grapes and passed them
round. As the first note of midnight struck, the
name of Simon Peter reverberated round the Church
and the first grape was swallowed. A shudder went
through the crowd at the sixth Apostle; Bartholo-
mew’s grape was within an inch of blocking Dona
d’Estrella’s throat. Jude was reached and passed
safely, and relief came in sight when, with the
swallowing of Simon’s grape a seed went the wrong
way and Dona d’Estrella began to cough. She
placed the twelfth grape in her mouth and the
people forgot their part, and prospective good for-
tune, in the disaster which confronted them. They
stood open-mouthed, having swallowed Simon.
Then Dona d’Estrella spluttered and out shot
Judas Iscariot’s grape to the floor.
“At that moment Perra Chica, her little dog, who
was sitting at her feet, bounded up and, uttering a
bark which there was no mistaking for other than
Judas Iscariot, with the last note of midnight bolted
the grape and saved Villajoyosa.
“ This action was recognised as a miracle,
although it was said afterwards that the fall of
Judas’ grape was due to his failure to our Lord,


and that his grape was fit only for a dog. But at
the time no such quibbles were felt. The only feel-
ing was one of gratefulness to Perra Chica, who
swallowed the blood of the twelfth Apostle and
deserved their gratitude.
“After the ceremony, the Dona d’Estrella, fol-
lowed by Perra Chica, retired to her apartment.
She went to an open window where she could see
the moonlit land beyond the walls, and the lights
of the Moors’ camp-fires. The Moors were clustered
round, wrapped in their cloaks, trying to keep
warm.
“ Hearing a bark, she glanced down and saw
Perra Chica wagging his tail, and looking very
pleased as he had in his mouth a flute which he had
found outside and dutifully brought to his mistress,
as a good dog should. She took the flute and,
regardless of the cold, played at the open window,
the clear notes spreading over roof and walls out
to the camp-fires under the moon. Unconsciously
she played the Moorish ‘ Home, Sweet Home,’ and
the melody, reaching the soldiers’ ears, set hearts
longing for their sunny land.
“ In the early light of that New Year’s morn, the
watchers on the walls saw the Moors breaking
camp, and by mid-day the last Moor had dis-
appeared and Villajoyosa was free.
“ Centuries later, the Church of San Perra Chica
was built on the site of the old church, and in the
Chapel of San Perra Chica de Los there is a group
carved by Salzillo of Murcia. Over the altar is a
figure of Judas Iscariot, and under him the Dona
d’Estrella Perra Grande, and Perra Chica d’Estrella
in the act of seizing the fallen fruit. The ceiling is


festooned with bunches of grapes, in twelves,
beautifully carved and gilt.
“ Perra Chica, or Little Dog, is the name given
to five-centimo pieces, because his image was cast
on that coin when first struck in Villajoyosa. And
the head of the Dona d’Estrella Perra Grande was
placed on the ten-centimos, which became the Perra
Grande, or Big Dog piece.
“ The names have spread over Spain, and the
custom of eating the grapes on New Year’s Eve is
observed on the Puerta del Sol, in Madrid, where
the names of the twelve Apostles have been
dropped, being too difficult a feat for modern folk
to perform when swallowing their grapes. Never-
theless, it is still a sign of good fortune to swallow
the fruit to the twelve strokes of the midnight hour.
“And that hour is striking,” exclaimed Senor
d’Escargot. “ I must be off.”


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
WHEREIN THE DECLINE OF PAINTING IN PARIS
IS MORE SERIOUS THAN THE VILLA “ FOR EVER,”
AND FRENCH ART REJOICES IN THE “AUTO-
ADORATION.”
ONDON lay due north as the “ Yin-Yang ” left
Villajoyosa with the dew on the orange trees.
“An hour’s flight,” said Brighten Airey, “ would
mean an early landing, and Londoners are late
risers. Since regarding itself as the centre of the
earth, the City has overslept and snores while the
world moves. Let us, therefore, proceed at a
leisurely pace and land at nine o’clock, when Lon-
don is refreshed by her slumber.”
Hornblower remarked at breakfast that his
youthful days were spent in France. He aspired
to become a painter, but, having a liking for music,
took to the trade of making horns.
“ Parisians,” he said, “ were very good blowers.
“ Paris was the centre of the world for painters.
Millions of pictures were painted every year and
hung in exhibitions which needed rickshas to con-
vey visitors round the walls. Myriads of modern
masters were proclaimed who dazzled Paris, until
they died, when they were buried and forgotten,
except in English-speaking countries.
“ Years ago, the painters started what was called
the Impressionistic School. Monet painted light.
As soon as his pictures lost the first freshness of
paint, and had to rely on the placing of dark and
light, they became dull and mostly senseless. Each
modern leader, in turn, was hailed as a new master.
He passed away and his place was filled by another.


Painting became a system of poses under all man-
ner of names, and steadily grew worse, until paint
was applied without sincerity and without vision.
A few painters tried to prevent the decline, but
having no creative imagination their efforts went
the way of all works which fail in mankind’s
greatest task.
“ France has never produced a great painter, nor
a great sculptor. It has produced a number of
artists, in both arts, who have been received as
leaders in France and other northern countries, but
their works have not excelled the masters of the
south. Enthusiasm for its art made Paris the
centre of the European world, and was a mistake.
Italy painted abominably, but Italians knew that
their art was dead. The French deluded themselves
that theirs was flourishing, and died with their
tongue in their cheek. Insincerity was the last
resort of ignorance,”
As they flew over the Pyrenees, Hornblower
recalled the time when he passed a holiday in the
Riviera.
“ It was spring,” he said, “ and plum trees were
in blossom. Love perfumed the air. The house of
my abode was called ‘ Mons Veneris,’ and next door
was a jerry-built villa with an ironical look in the
two upper windows. It was called ‘ For Ever.’
The windows seemed to question the name, as their
cornices rose quizzically. Could the owner, who
was newly married, have expected to love there for
ever? The Lord’s Prayer recites: ‘The power and
the glory, for ever and ever.’ But is it? Would
France itself live for ever? ”
“ If there is anything eternal in this world,” said
Chih, “it is the I Ching. When the books held


sacred, as most full of precious wisdom, have be-
come absurd and primitive, scholars still will read
the I Ching, convinced that it holds the secret of
humanity. Not knowing what it means, they will
ascribe to the book the deepest wisdom and greatest
philosophic truths which they can imagine. The
I Ching must be great because nobody knows any-
thing about it, and for this reason will interest
mankind for ever. When the sun casts his last
beams on the dying earth, ninety millions of years
hence, the last sage will hold to the failing light
his I Ching, declaring that he has the secret. For
the rest, it must be as with the windows of your
villa, an ironical smile, a lift of the eyebrows, at
the saying ‘ For Ever.’ There is no such thing.”
“ Nevertheless,” said Hornblower, “ there are
many who would not agree with you, and some in
Paris would deny that the Church is not eternal.
“ Monsieur Benisa had a shop in the shadow of
St. Sulpice. He was a maker of Nativities and
Adorations. At Christmas, not long ago, his master-
work was placed in the shop which was all window.
It was a life-sized Adoration, moulded in plaster
and brilliantly coloured. The Infant Christ lav in a
wicker basket on the floor of a stable strewn with
hay. Around were placed the Virgin, with shep-
herds in attendance, a few sheep, and a wonderful
camel which attracted more admiration than all the
rest. Although in plaster, it was hard to believe
that the animal was not alive. It was so faithfully
imitated that a magpie, placed on its back, was
pulling out hairs to line its nest. A wisp of hay
hung from its mouth, and one expected to see its
jaws move as it stood in meditative silence above
our Saviour.


“ But there were no buyers. The demand for
Adorations, on so large a scale, had ceased.
“ On the second day of the new year an American
entered the shop and said:
“‘Monsieur! you are behind the times; your
Adoration is too old-fashioned. Do you not know
that the machine has taken the place, in the hearts
of men, formerly occupied by the miracles of our
Lord Jesus Christ? The day is not far-off when
mankind will succeed in inventing machines with
the means of reproducing their kind, and we shall
have an Adoration much more to the taste of the
populace than those which you model so admirably.’
“ The manufacturer took the stranger to be an
amiable and eccentric millionaire, and a possible
customer. He replied:
“‘ It is true, Monsieur, that automobiles take
most of the worshippers away from our churches,
yet I can hardly believe that a machine could arouse
in men the reverence which they feel towards our
Saviour, even though it were possible for its birth
from parent engines. The one is a divine miracle,
as everyone knows, while the other shows no signs
of ever being accomplished.’
“‘ Do not be too sure about that,’ said the
stranger, who was Joshua T, Tree, an automobile
dealer of Chicago; and pointing to a hoarding across
the street he continued:
“ ‘ On that poster you may observe the writing
on the wall:“ Seminal Oil for Autos.” Man has
already conceived the idea of making machines,
male and female, and is ready to sell the means of
fertilisation in the form of a seminal liquid.’
“ Monsieur Benisa was astonished by this state-
ment, which, he perceived was the result of Mr.


Joshua T. Tree’s limited knowledge of French,
which he spoke abominably, mistaking the meaning
of the French word for the English seminal, or
reproductive semen. Not wishing to contradict a
possible buyer, he said nothing and shook his head,
as if still in doubt.
“Mr. Joshua T. Tree continued;
“ ‘ The day is near when automobiles will be left
to themselves to beget their kind. There is no like-
lihood of an increase at such a rate as to overcome
man, as suggested by the Robots.
“ ‘ However, Monsieur, if you would undertake
the task of making the first Auto-Adoration, with
no less care than in your shop-group, it could be
exhibited in Chicago, where, if successful, another
dozen might be shipped.’
“Assuring himself of his customer’s generosity,
and making very good terms, Monsieur Benisa
agreed. He set to work on his group, and his
patron came from time to time to inspect progress
and to make suggestions, which he thought would
appeal to the Central-West.
“A miniature automobile surrounded by a variety
of motor-buses, trucks and sedans, went without
discussion. And Monsieur Benisa insisted on put-
ting in his camel, which he held in pride, pointing
out that it was a means of locomotion in the days
of Christ, and persists in sandy places where the
automobile cannot penetrate.
« ‘ Wheels,’ said Mr. Joshua T. Tree, ‘ are more
important than camels in the progress of humanity.
It is by their intelligent use that Man has emerged
from his primitive conditions of life. There is no-
thing more effective to which he owes his progress.
“ St. Christopher was an object of pride, although


he had to be placed on his knees to avoid knocking
his head on the ceiling. Monsieur Benisa recalled
that this saint was over fifty feet high in Toledo
Cathedral, and many gigantic paintings of him were
placed at the entrance to Spanish churches, where
to gaze on him would ensure that one could not die
without warning on that day. Originally the
Patron Saint of Shepherds, St. Christopher, in
modern times, became the Patron Saint of Auto-
mobiles, and had to be included.
“ Nevertheless, the owner was a little envious of
Europe’s distinctions in the Auto-Adoration, and
insisted on an American Saint being given a place.
This was done by setting up a figure of St. Petro-
leum, who was a Spanish girl in Mexico. On a
bleak night she rescued a priest who was dying of
cold and starvation, and in trying to get a spark to
light a fire, she struck the ground and petrol gushed
forth, bursting into flames, with the result that the
priest was warmed and the maid became Saint
Petroleum.
“ But Monsieur Benisa refused to include a
twenty-dollar bill which Mr. Joshua T. Tree sub-
mitted as evidence of the pride of his country in
transportation, having engraved on its back a train,
a steamship, an automobile, an aeroplane and a
tug-boat, with the Statue of Liberty faint in the
distance.
“ ‘ Transportation,’ he declared, 4 is the religion
of the United States. In Chicago is a great sky-
sign, high in the night, overlooking the lake, and
bearing the word “ Transportation.” The elevators
of the Congress Hotel have incense burning, and
over the lawns, beside the lake and art museums,
by Michigan Avenue, the roar of trains, with tolling


bells and whooping engines, make transportation
dominant.’
“ When the Auto-Adoration was placed in the
shop crowds gathered and were amused. But when
Mr. Joshua T. Tree removed the group to Chicago
no further orders came and the Church withdrew
its patronage. The God of Transportation was too
celibate, and Monsieur Benisa ended his days
hawking round the Virgin, delicately modelled.”
“Your friend,” said Brighten Airey, “made a
mistake in attributing sex relationships to inven-
tions. To the American mind, transportation is be-
yond the movements of sex, and to suggest breeding
automobiles is to offend his creative genius.”
“ Never mind,” said Goodspeed, “in a few
minutes we must pass the Customs inspection at
Croydon.”


CHAPTER NINETEEN
WHEREIN THE “ YIN-YANG ” ALIGHTS IN LONDON
AT THE APOTHECARIES’ GARDEN AND, WHILE
PI PO WINS THE DERBY, PERMANENT WHITE
DISCOURSES ON HIS ART, WHICH HAS GONE
ASTRAY, AND A LIKE FATE HAS OVERTAKEN
THE APOTHECARIES’ BOTTLES, WHEN PI PO’S
AILMENT IS DIAGNOSED AS DUE TO FOOD
TROUBLE, AND EUCALYPTUS LEAVES ARE
TAKEN IN SCOTLAND, WHERE IS REVEALED
THE SOURCE OF ENGLAND’S GREATNESS, AND
THE GOD EU TELLS OF THE “ THREE TREES
OF THE ACROPOLIS ” IN THE “ GREAT INVASION.”
WHERE did you find this old bird? ” said the
Customs Officer at Croydon, gazing at the
phoenix prow, as Brighten Airey stepped from the
doorway under the tail of the “Yin-Yang” and
presented his credentials.
“ Oh! it flew into Celestion,” replied the Master,
“ and needing a mate we brought it to London.”
“ You are behind the times,” said the official.
“We no longer breed birds of the air. They are
messing about with Nature on the Continent, but
we stick to Science, which is progressive. Your
best plan is to take the bird to the Apothecaries’
Garden and feed it on reproductive berries.”
“Where is this garden?’’said Brighten Airey,
smiling at the pleasantries.
“On the Embankment in Chelsea. I’ll ring the
Apothecary and tell him you are coming.”
“ Thanks! That will be the very place, to lay
eggs in, if nothing else.”
“Nothing to declare, I suppose?” said the


official. “No foreign literature? No Members of
Parliament? No new gods?”
“No!” replied the Master.
“Fly ahead!” said the Customs Officer, placing
a chalk mark by the open doorway.
Consulting his map of London, the Master found
the Apothecaries’ Garden facing the Thames be-
tween Battersea Bridge and Chelsea Hospital
Alighting on a lawn in the middle of the garden,
the Apothecary welcomed them to London and
invited all to help themselves to medicinal herbs
and berries, which they might need, but to avoid
unpleasant results it would be as well to consult a
gardener as some of the plants were decidedly
poisonous.”
“We shall be careful,” replied Brighten Airey,
thanking their host.
A stream of char-a-bancs, packed with people,
were passing along the Embankment, and Hurry
Fifty asked what was the occasion.
“Don’t you know?” said the Apothecary, “This
is Derby Day! ”
Instantly the Four H, men from Celestion pricked
up their ears,
Derby Day! said Hurry, “The greatest day
of the year in England I ”
“ If you care to see the race a char-a-banc can be
ordered from the King’s Road without delay,” said
the Apothecary.
“ Please do not trouble about that,” replied
Brighten Airey. “ The ‘ Yin-Yang ’ could take us
there in a few minutes.”
“ The race cannot be seen from the air,” said the
Apothecary. “All flying machines are prohibited


since they blocked the light over the course and
the Derby was finished in darkness.”
“Already, we are provincials! ” said Goodspeed,
with a smile.
“All England is provincial nowadays,” replied the
Apothecary.
Goodspeed and Chih having decided to remain on
the “ Yin-Yang” and attend to their respective tasks
of overhauling the machine and entering the ledger,
the others went off on a small char-a-banc to see
the race, Wu insisting on taking Pi Po, who was
inclined to be fretful, and Chang was left to him-
self in the Apothecaries’ Garden. When they
reached the course at Epsom and their char-a-banc
was parked, the immense concourse of people,
amidst taxis, motor cars, donkey carts and wheel-
barrows, was bewildering. Side-shows were doing
a thriving trade, and they stopped to watch an
artist who was perched on a stand, making
drawings. A calico sign announced that Washing-
ton Palestine, of the late Academy, would make a
portrait in one minute. Taking chalk and a large
sheet of paper, pinned to his board, the artist, be-
ginning with the tail, rapidly drew an elephant,
which resembled Chang so closely that Brighten
Airey stepped forward and inquired the price.
“We are not permitted to sell our works.”
replied Washington Palestine. “Artists draw for
the love of it nowadays. But you can have the
drawing! and he rolled up the elephant and gave
it to the Master, Immediately he pinned up another
sheet of paper and, asking Brighten Airey to blind-
fold his eyes, drew a self-portrait which roused
cheers from the audience. He was a remarkable
draftsman.


Presently they came to the saddling paddock and
stopped to watch the crowd. It was a gay sight.
Everyone was dressed in a red, white and blue
smock, with black trousers and green hats adorned
with the British lion, stamped and gilt. No charges
were made for admittance to any part of the course
and the crowd wandered at will. In a corner of
the paddock was an old man with a thin horse,
talking to a German Jew, who laughed and walked
away, leaving the old man despondent. As they
approached, Hurry Fifty stopped and addressed
this old man;
“ There will be worse horses than yours in the
race. A little more condition and he would be a
beauty.”
“ None better at Epsom to-day! ” replied the old
man, evidently pleased. “ Firefly is his name, and
to fly like fire his nature. But he cannot run
there is no one to ride him. All look at him and
laugh.”
“ Perhaps he is too old,” said Honeybunn.
“Old! Not he! His time is better than the
favourite’s. He is all I have left from a once full
stable.”
Quietly Wu said to Brighten Airey:“Tell the
old man to put Pi Po on his horse. The opossum
can ride. When the horses go galloping round the
paddocks under the Kurrajong Range, it is the
opossums’ race meeting, with the stars to guide
them. They mount the swiftest horses who love to
race.”
“ What weight should he carry? ” asked Brighten
Airey.
“ Eight stone for the Derby,” replied the old man.


It is a light weight, and the winner is the pride of
England.”
“ Well! we have a rider: an opossum from Celes-
tion. No! it is not a joke,” Brighten Airey added as
the old man laughed.
“ The opossum is a rider, and faster than men,”
said Wu. “Pi Po can win if your horse has the
pace.”
The old man looked hard at Wu and Pi Po, and
said:
“I’ll do it! But what about the colours, which
are light blue? A jockey’s clothes would not fit
the opossum.”
“ Come along,” said Brighten Airey, and they
went to an old woman selling oranges.
“Mother! lend us your apron?” said the old
man, explaining his difficulty.
Looking at the horse, the orange seller laughed.
Then suddenly she stopped. Memories of past
Derbies and great horses came to her mind as she
looked at Firefly.
“Here, old dear!’’she said, and pulled off her
apron of clean, light blue. With her assistance and
pins, Pi Po was clad in a jacket and, perched on
Firefly, did not look amiss. The saddle had to be
packed with lead to give the correct weight, and
there was some doubt about an opossum being
eligible to ride, but the stewards agreed on seeing
Pi Po’s style.
As the horses came onto the course the favourite
was received with cheers, and when Firefly and
Pi Po cantered past, the crowd laughed.
“ Put ’em in the zoo!” cried a wag.
Firefly was fighting for his head, and Pi Po hung
on, crouching on the saddle.


“ They are off! ” cried the crowd, and the light
blue was hidden in the ruck.
“ Firefly knows his race,” said the old man.
Entering the straight, the favourite was in third
place, with Firefly close behind, on the outside.
The second horse was overtaken and passed, and
as they neared the winning-post the favourite
assumed the lead, and the crowd roaredCoal-
dust wins!” Then Firefly came with a great run
and drew level. The jockey plied the whip to Coal-
dust, who responded; but Pi Po left the saddle and,
clutching Firefly’s mane, crept forward on his neck
and whispered in that language which only animals
know. His ears lay flat as Firefly gathered himself
in his stride, shot past the favourite and won by a
length. A great silence fell on the crowd. And
then came cheering as the numbers went up: Fire-
fly, first; Coaldust, second; Petrol, third.
“Who is the rider? ” asked a press reporter.
“Pi Po of the ‘Yin-Yang,’” replied Brighten
Airey, while Firefly rubbed his nose on the opos-
sum’s back.
“ It was a great race,” said the old man, as they
handed her apron to the orange seller. “ Here,
Mother! Your light blue won the Derby!”
“No! It was this little gentleman,” she said,
giving Pi Po an orange.
Meanwhile, Goodspeed, having finished overhaul-
ing his engines, called Chih-hu, and together they
walked in the Apothecaries’ Garden.
On the gate pier of the Embankment entrance
was written: “ The Botanical Garden of the Society
of Apothecaries of London. A.D. 1673.” And over
the gate was the Apothecaries’ coat of arms: “The
Worshipful Company of Apothecaries. London.


Incorporated 6th December, 1617.” Azure. Apollo,
with his beard radiant, holding in his left hand a
bow, in his right an arrow, all or, supplanting a
serpent argent. Crest. On a wreath of colours, a
rhinoceros slatant proper.
“What is your opinion of the coat of arms?”
said Goodspeed.
“Apollo is immaculate,” replied Chih, “ standing
over the back of the serpent, which, however, is
really a European version of the dragon. The
designer, evidently, was at a loss when he placed
only two legs to support a body which curls off
into the air and could not have moved except by
painfully dragging its length. And the dragon
shows that curious failing in European design to
imagine anything connected with Nature which
comes from the mind. Thus the rhinoceros, on the
top, is a well-supported animal and suggests reality,
while the dragon”— Chih shook his head —“it will
never do.”
Coming to a secluded lawn in the garden, they
saw an old man at work on a picture. As they
turned away, not wishing to intrude, he said:
“ Pray, do not retreat. This work is of no impor-
tance. It is only a means of filling in time. My
sons,” he said, impressively, “ the greatest mistake
one can make is to bring to completion the task
one loves most. We should continue working at it
without heed or desire for whatever fame or for-
tune which it might bring, even though necessity
seems to demand fulfilment. The joy of work is in
the effort and not in the satisfaction which com-
pletion brings.”
Permanent White, having introduced himself,
continued:


“ For eighteen years I sat here at work on a
picture which was sold. Those were the happiest
years of my life. When the eagerness and futility
of youth had passed, a picture of this garden was
commenced. Working all day, changing the hues
as the light changed, sunset succeeding the bril-
liance of the morning, and beginning again next day
when, perhaps, the sky was strewn with fleecy
clouds to be laid over the red and gold of yesterday,
never was the subject dull and the picture never a
perfect rendering of the scene before me. In this
engaging and harmonious occupation the years
passed. Then, in the spring of the nineteenth year,
a visitor to the garden approached with these
words:
“ Time is the secret of great art. That which we
do to-day is, according to Ruskin, the masterwork
of to-morrow. Or was it Whistler in the ‘ Gentle
Art?
Then,’ said I, by way of a joke, ‘ this picture,
of eighteen years’ work, must be a good one.’ And
before I knew what he was doing, the visitor
grabbed my picture and thrust into my hand the
amount which he named.
“At first, realization of the loss was deadened by
the flattery of having sold my work. But on sitting
down again to begin another picture on a new can-
vas, the fat thickness and the surface of a thousand
scrapings, which I loved so well, had gone and the
rough surface was a poor substitute for the patina
of a myriad coats.”
“ Your loss,” said Chih, “ is that which has over-
taken European art. For a century, or two, pictures
were painted in imitation of Nature, as she appeared
in full reality. Then doubt assailed the minds of


the painters and they began to paint without con-
tentment, and in seeking new sight have lost their
way. But light is dawning and, presently, one will
take from Nature only that which he selects, leaving
the tree from the mountain, or the mountain from
the tree, according to his vision. He will use Nature
with respect, but subservient to his artist’s mind.”
“ That may be,” said Permanent White, “ but for
me the old surface has gone and in the new there
is no satisfaction.”
“Ah! you are English,” said Chih, “ and resent
change. Life cannot stop still and, willy-nilly, you
must go with it, either in the van or dragging be-
hind, according to your nature. There is no choice.
Man is a tiny insect on the earth’s surface and is
obliged to follow where his instinct leads.”
As they returned towards the “ Yin-Yang ” the
Apothecary stepped from behind a juniper bush and
said:
“ It may be a ridiculous remark from one dwelling
amongst medicinal herbs and berries, to say nothing
of roots and seeds, but indigestion is a baffling
complaint. Psycho-analysts, osteopaths, homoeo-
paths and allopaths, alike, have failed to find a new
remedy. In China, I believe,” he said, addressing
Chih, “ the malady is almost unknown.”
“ It is true,” replied Chih, “ that people in China
have little of it. Perhaps Europeans make a habit
of chewing their food excessively. The Chinese do
not masticate nearly as much, preferring, especially
amongst the manual workers, to swallow their food
quickly. With a knowledge only of a few house-
wives’ remedies, used in Northern China, which
prevents a suggestion of consequence, the most
notable difference between East and West is that


the former prefers its cures in buckets instead of
elegant phials.”
“ Bottles are as antiquated as buckets,” replied
the Apothecary, “ and soon will become as rare
as the red and green bulbous jars in apothecaries’
windows. Nowadays, cures are taken from a
needle.”
“At any rate,” replied Chih, “ our cook, Wu Chih,
would readily mix a bucket of remedies from the
herbs in your garden, many of which must be
known to him, as he cultivated a garden in Nan-
king.”
“ That would be agreeable,” said the Apothe-
cary, “ But I notice that your elephant is partaking
freely of the bushes and shrubs in the garden. Is
it not alarming to allow an animal to eat where
poisonous herbs abound?”
“ Not in the least,” said Chih. “ Chang knows
what is good for himself much better than a human
being.”
“ Men are not always particular,” replied the
Apothecary.
“Toxin Azoic had a habit of tasting berries and
queer fruits when he dwelt in Persia. One day he
found a fruit which resembled a cumquat, and,
eating of it, suffered agony which continued for
weeks. Recovering, he was surprised to find that
malaria no longer troubled him. At Port Said,
when returning to England, a mosquito lodged on
his hand, and as he was about to strike the insect it
fell as though drunk, and died, as did flies at Naples.
“ Settling down in London, he fell in love with
a beautiful girl who, in a transport of passion, bit
him and was seized with violent pains. Suffering
agony, she died in his arms.


“ Toxin Azoic was overcome with grief, and sus-
picions began to plague him about the cause of
his sweetheart’s death. The inquest had revealed
nothing. Half-crazy, he went to Grasse, where, in
his melancholy mood, he walked in the woods. A
viper lay across his path and rose to strike, when
it was overcome with fear and vanished in the
undergrowth. Toxin Azoic was filled with horror
as he realized that even snakes were afraid of him
—a man deadly to life.
“ Returning to London, he made a will and com-
mitted suicide. His will directed that his body
should be burnt and the ashes cast into mid-Atlantic
at midnight. If put into the ground he would
poison the worms.”
“An elephant,” said Chih, “ never makes a
mistake about his food. He knows what will agree
with his digestion.”
“And so does an opossum,” said Wu, who had
approached quietly while they talked, “Pi Po is
sick! ”
“ Did he ramble in the garden with the ele-
phant? ” asked the Apothecary.
No! said Wu. “He was never out of the
‘ Yin-Yang ’ until we took him to Epsom, where
he won the Derby.” And Wu recounted the tale
of Pi Po’s victory for the “Yin-Yang.”
Let us take a look at him,” said the Apothecary,
and they went to the box at the end of the deck
and saw Pi Po, huddled and miserable.
“ He was not himself when we started out,” said
Wu, “ and after the excitement of the race was over
he became distressed.”
The Apothecary told Wu to open the opossum’s
mouth, which Pi Po promptly did himself, to the


Apothecary’s amazement. “ Food trouble! ”he said,
laying his hand on Pi Po’s stomach.
“ Yes! ” said Wu. “He wants some eucalyptus
leaves. You have the tree in your garden? ”
“Unfortunately, no!” replied the Apothecary.
“ The eucalyptus cannot be grown in London. But
you will find the tree in the garden of my friend,
Henry Carlisle, of Ayrshire.”
“What! in a Scottish garden? ” Brighten Airey
exclaimed.
“ Yes, on a sheltered slope where the cold winds
do not blow. Here,” he said, drawing a map on a
prescription paper, “is the spot.”
Brighten Airey looked at his watch. It was eight
o’clock.
“ We must be off,” he said, thanking the Apothe-
cary for his kindness.
“ Wait a minute,” said Chih, and taking Wu with
him, he explained rapidly in Chinese what the
Apothecary wanted, and Wu, with a wooden
bucket, disappeared in the garden. Presently he
returned, and presenting the bucket filled with
Chinese herbs to the Apothecary, advised the boil-
ing of the contents on a slow fire, when, on taking
the brew, indigestion would vanish.
The Apothecary received the bucket with a smile
of gratitude, and the “ Yin-Yang ” rose into the
evening sky, observed by Chelsea artists playing
bowls in the garden of their club.
All speed was made for the north, and, following
the Apothecary’s map, in twenty minutes Brighten
Airey landed the “ Yin-Yang ” on the lawn in front
of the house in Ayrshire. Knocking at the door,
Chih-hu asked for Henry Carlisle and learnt that
he was in London. “ Never mind,” he said, “ all


we require is permission to place an opossum in
the eucalyptus tree which the Apothecary of the
Chelsea Garden said grew here.”
The door was edging towards closing as these
words were uttered, when he added: “Pi Po, the
opossum from Celestion, is not well, and we are
anxious about his health.”
Immediately the door was thrown open and Scot-
tish hospitality welcomed the visitors. A gardener
led the way to a sheltered spot where grew a stately
young eucalyptus tree, and Wu placed Pi Po on a
branch as the light of the moon followed the dying
day.
After dinner that night, when all were anxious,
Heaviside ventured to tell this tale:
“ When the world was young the Yin overtook
the Yang. The earth trembled, and the universe
opened as loveillary attraction appeared. Stars
united with stars, and planets with planets. The
sun heaved and threw out new worlds. Only the
moon remained placid and cool.
“A shower of star-seed fell from the Empyrean,
scattering through the middle-air, where some was
lost and became stardust of the Silver River. And
some fell to earth; onto snow and became barren;
onto deserts and shrivelled away. But some fell
into warm springs and germinated.
“ In course of time, gods issued from the warm
springs, the womb of earth, and never were quite
terrestrial. One star-seed fell into a warm spring at
Bath, and the god which was born was the god of
the first Britons. From his worship sprang the
legend of the Englishman and his tub, which per-
sists to this day. For the tub is the source of
England s greatness. All histories of great peoples


recount their use of the bath. There is nothing
greater to mention.”
“Where has Wu gone?” asked Brighten Airey,
following the silence which greeted Heaviside’s tale,
and observing that the cook had disappeared.
“ Out to see how Pi Po fares,” replied Chih,
and with Chang in attendance he followed Wu to
the eucalyptus tree, which was filled with silvery
points of light where the moonlight fell on its
young leaves.
Pi Po was sitting on a branch, having eaten his
fill, and Chang looked up at him. Wu looked at
Chih, and Chih said:
“ Speak, Chang Li Heng! ”
The eyes of the opossum gleamed as they fell on
the upturned blue of Chang’s, and the elephant,
with his bamboo sticks, his trunk and tusks,
recounted Pi Po’s tale, as he stood in the moonlight
by the eucalyptus tree with Chih-hu and Wu Chib
silently watching.
“ In the beginning of the world, the Great Eu
was god of the eucalyptus, which tree grew in the
southern land now called Australia. And the
eucalyptus flourished and produced a great diversity
of trees.
“ There came men from Britain, and with their
axes felled forests. In course of time vast areas
were cleared and the forest-devil reigned supreme,
and the land was misty with the smoke of burning
eucalyptus. Thus, the people who formerly had
respect for trees, acquired the habit of felling them,
and the eucalyptus suffered without reason.
“ Yet the Great Eu watched and made no sign.
He did not protest against the clearing of the land,
which he saw was just. But when senseless


destruction of his children began, he was shocked
and was sad that the beauty of trees was no pro-
tection from crude hands. Then he planned to teach
the barbarians to love the eucalyptus trees and
protect them from useless slaughter. And this was
his plan:
“ Seeds and plants of the eucalyptus began to
leave Australia by the ships that came and went.
East and west across the oceans they spread to
South America and South Africa, and islands
of the two seas. Without pause they crossed the
Equator, and in the north-east settled in North
America, where, in California, the eucalyptus be-
came a tree amongst the habitations of men and
speedily was regarded as a well-loved native.
North-west it went to India, and further on to
Abyssinia, where the King, recognizing the hand
of the Great Eu, made the eucalyptus a sacred tree.
And it was received in Egypt with honour and
affection.
“ On through Palestine it continued and came to
Greece, the mother of Europe. Eucalypoulos, the
Curator of the Acropolis, saw that trees were desir-
able beside the Parthenon, and could not decide
which would flourish best on the treeless rock.
“ One night he was wakened from sleep by the
noise of the wind blowing from Phaleron Bay.
Something was tap-tapping at his window, and
when he arose he saw a branch of the eucalyptus
tree, which grew beside his house, laden with seeds
which knocked on the glass. The leaves glistened
like stars in the moonlight, and he was entranced
by their beauty. Then he planted the Three Trees
of the Acropolis, and they grew and overcame the
l 177


barrenness of the site, and became the most beauti-
ful young eucalypts in the world. And their kind
flourished in Greece beside the olive, which had
spread to Australia, and dwelt side-by-side with
eucalypts, often by the banks of streams in dense
forests.
“To Italy the tree spread, where, on the Cam-
pania, it decreased fever and malaria, and was
received in Spain as a beautiful tree. When it came
to the Riviera, in France, a note of gaiety seemed
to surround the tree as it grew beside its ancient
comrades the kurrajongs and casuarinas of the
south. The pleasant life at Monte Carlo gave the
tree a whimsical air, and when, on a moonlit night,
an Irish lady whom bad luck had followed emerged
from the Casino, and a eucalyptus attracting her
attention, she danced around the trunk to get good
luck at the tables, where six hundred thousand
francs were won that evening, as she declared, by
the tree’s doing.
“And then a struggle for survival began as the
tree moved northwards. Some perished at Grasse,
not far from the coast, where the melancholy of a
strange land upset the eucalyptus. Nevertheless,
in France the making of designs, and soaps, and
oils, from its leaves and seed-pods, were better done
than in its native land. The spread was bearing
fruit.
So the tree reached England and flourished in
Cornwall, where the leaves and seed-pods became
a brighter green and were sold in the florists’ shops
of London. And the fragrance of burning eucalyp-
tus leaves tickled northern noses, and potters made
pots of grey-green hue and called them eucalyptus
vases.


“ Thus came this tree to its northern outpost,
and the spread continues. The Great Eu watches,
and marshals the eucalypts of snowy mountains,
and the legions will advance in cold northern lands
until the tree will flourish in most of the world.
And this will be the greatest spread of living things.
Beside it the Anglo-Saxon spread is small. And
the eucalyptus will become like an oak, or
an elm, a plane, or an olive a friend of
man. Britons will venerate them, and the
barbarians who now destroy their beauty will
learn to love their tree; to make beautiful objects
with their wood; ornaments from their flowers and
leaves; and their oils will spread ease over
humanity’s travail, and the distress of the world
will decline. And the Great Eu, will he be regarded
as a benefactor of man? That is the secret of the
future.”
Silently, Chih-hu saw Wu beckon to Pi Po, and
the opossum came down to his arms and, with
Chang following, they returned to the “ Yin-Yang.”
Goodspeed listened quietly when Chih told of the
Great Eu’s work, and said:
“ It is a sign of the workings of some power
beyond our knowledge. Whether we call it the
Great Eu, the Supreme Ultimate, or by any other
name, we cannot penetrate the mystery. Humanity
must obey and, like the eucalyptus tree, send forth
new creativeness from the place of its birth over
the stagnant world. The eucalyptus is stirring.


CHAPTER TWENTY
WHICH TELLS OF A BATTLE IN ENGLAND AND
PICTURES IN NORTH AMERICA, INTERWOVEN
WITH ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES AND MELONS
WHICH ARE NOT AS UNRELATED AS APPEARS
AT FIRST SIGHT.
HONEYBUNN remarked the next morning, as
the “ Yin- Yang ” turned southwards, that his
ancestors were Staffordshire men, and in 1807 were
members of the Primitive Melody Church, which
was founded on Moo Cow Hill.
“ Then you would like to see the hill of your
ancestors,” said Brighten Airey.
Unless it has been built over, and the Brethren
dispersed,” replied Honeybunn.
“We shall soon see,” said the Master, as he
noted the position of Moo Cow Hill and set their
course for it.
Chih was on the telephone, calling Celestion,
having forgotten the difference in time, and when
the office answered, Senor Tortue had gone to bed.
“ Please tell him that the Anglo-Saxons are in
the hey-day of a scientific life and no business with
Celestion can be done.”
While he spoke Manchester appeared, a city
without any smoke. Everything was made by
electrical power, and the people were engaged in
addressing each other on scientific subjects. The
cotton industry had disappeared, as had the manu-
facture of most woollen materials in the north,


and everyone was arrayed in hurrayon clothes and
sought relief in talking.
At the centre of a square, in the middle of the
city, elocutionists were gathered in crowds,
haranguing isolated groups of hang-dog men, put
up on platforms, who were ex-Members of Parlia-
ment, and in the midst of the platforms stood a
huge monument a figure of a mighty man up-
holding a globe.
“ That,” remarked Brighten Airey, “ must be
Science upholding the Island.”
“ Science,” said Goodspeed, “is in reality but
an undeveloped form of creativeness. Man, when
too blind to work creatively, instinctively turns to
science as an outlet for his creative energy. And
the blindness of an island is due to its isolation.
Manchester is curiously like the fables told in Celes-
tion of the dim past.”
“There lies Moo Cow Hill!” Brighten Airey
exclaimed, as they passed the northern border of
Staffordshire, and he stopped the “Yin-Yang ” in
mid-air. “Hallo! what is going on?”
Moo Cow Hill was the scene where, in 1807, a
gathering of devout men held a camp meeting on
the summit and founded the Primitive Melody
Church. Since that day the hill has remained as
a memorial of their faith and determination. It
possessed facilities as a stepping-off spot for
Heaven.
Under the top of Moo Cow was a solid bed of
stone which, however, attracted an unsympathetic
Corporation who desired to establish a quarry,
ignoring the drawbacks of a hole in the ground as
a starting point to contemplated flights through the
upper air.


As the “ Yin-Yang ” stopped, Aldermanic forces
were advancing to attack the Brethren who were
entrenched on the summit of the hill. Armed with
gas bombs and writs of ejectment, they bombarded
the defenders, who replied by rolling down huge
balls of blazing tracts. The eyes of the Brethren
became filled with tears, and their fire-balls went
astray as the Aldermen dodged and advanced. A
miracle was needed to save their hill.
“ Senor Tortue is calling,” said Wu, as he came
on deck, and Chih hurried off to the telephone.
“Look!” said Wu, pointing down the hill, “ the
field is afire.”
One of the blazing balls had rolled into a field
of ripe wheat and smoke was rising. Shouts came
from down the hill and the Aldermen heard and,
seeing the smoke, rushed to help save the field.
And the Primitive Melody Brethren followed. All
were good farmers.
As Chih returned to the deck, he said;
“ Did Christianity win? ”
“ The Battle of Moo Cow Hill is not finished,”
replied Goodspeed, with a smile. “ Nature inter-
vened and both sides forgot their quarrel in the
face of fundamental truth: wheat is of greater
importance than the top of Moo Cow Hill.”
Chih turned to Brighten Airey and said:
“ Senor Tortue suggests proceeding immediately
to the Perce rock, four miles from Bonaventure,
off the Gaspe Peninsula, in the Gulf of St. Law-
rence.”
“ It is now ten o’clock,” the Master said, looking
at his watch and consulting the map. “We should
be there in a little over two hours, or, in American
time, at eight fifteen o’clock this morning.”


“ Half-an-hour should suffice on the rock,” said
Chih, “ and then we are to make for New York.”
“ That would mean about an hour of easy flying,”
said the Master, looking again at his map. “And
what is it all about? ”
“ The story which the Senor told is one of trea-
sure,” replied Chih.
“ Esrom Handinhand, a Canadian, who had come
to Celestion, entered the office and handed the
Senor a newspaper cutting, which was faded and
thin, yet still could be read, bearing an account of a
pirate’s hoard. This story, declared the owner, was
perfectly true.
“ Captain Peter Duval plied his trade in the
eighteenth century, around the Bay of Biscay. In
the ‘ Vulture,’ his ship of a hundred tons, with four
guns and a crew of twenty-seven, he captured many
ships and acquired much treasure. Being an able
man of business, he decided to leave his exceedingly
profitable calling and become a worthy citizen be-
fore the navy captured his ship. As the income
tax—under a polite name—of old England would
have meant the loss of much of his hard-earned
fortune, he decided to make his home on the island
of Bonaventure, in the Gulf of St. Lawrence.
“ In those days, banks being unknown in remote
places, he was obliged to hide his wealth, and suc-
ceeded in scaling the Perce rock, which lay close
at hand. With sheer limestone cliffs rising well-
nigh three hundred feet above the sea, the rock, of
about seven hundred yards in length and a hundred
yards in width, was practically impregnable and
offered no inducement to scale its one hazardous
path.
“ Here, on the eastern face of the rock, a little


below the edge of the cliff, he found a cave and,
lowering himself by a rope, deposited his treasure.
The limestone rock frequently disintegrated, and
shortly after Captain Peter Duval secreted his
hoard, the precarious path by which he had climbed,
collapsed, leaving a sheer face like the rest of the
rock. Thereafter he came in a boat and gazed at
the spot where his wealth was stored, and could
not approach it. Until he died and the story of
his treasure became a legend.
“After a lapse of nearly two centuries, during
which many climbers tried to scale the vertical
cliffs, breaking their necks in the effort, necessi-
tating an act being passed to prohibit the scaling;
aeroplanes also have failed to land on the rough
rock where, according to Esrom Handinhand, the
treasure still lies in the eastern cave.”
At eight minutes past eight, in American time,
Brighten Airey brought the “ Yin-Yang ” over the
Perce rock. They had gained an hour and fifty-
two minutes by the trip. Fortunately, the wind
was slight, and descending close to the cliff on the
eastern side a small entrance to a cave was dis-
closed.
The Master then lowered the plane gently to the
top of the rock, which was sloping and rugged, and
Chih, with Hurry Fifty, Heaviside and Hornblower,
who was the lightest weight, stepped off with a
length of rope, and Hornblower descended over the
edge of the cliff.
“You are trespassing!” called a Customs officer
from a launch, which had come round the base of
the rock, “ What is your business in that cave? ”
“ Treasure trove! ” replied Hurry, as Hornblower
swung into the opening. “ Captain Duval stole it


from France and we take it as finding is keeping.”
“No you don’t!” said the officer, and raising
a rifle he shot through the lower end of the rope
which, with a stone attached, Hornblower had laid
on the edge of the opening, and it fell into the sea.
Hurry seized a rock to hurl at the launch, when
Brighten Airey appeared and called:
“ Good morning! ”
“ Good morning, Captain! ” came the reply.
“We are acting under instructions to examine
this cave for treasure,” said the Master, “ and, of
course, any found will be submitted to your Gov-
ernment. To save wasting time, perhaps you will
agree that as we are here an inspection might be
made to find whether there is anything to submit.
We are curious, and I daresay you are, too.”
“You bet!” the officer replied. “Go ahead
and try your luck! ”
Heaviside pulled up the shattered rope and
attached another stone, which was swung into the
cave as Hornblower appeared with a panel, half
his length, covered with cobwebs. He was hauled
to the top and reported that the cave had been
looted, nothing remaining except the panel. Chih
brushed away the cobwebs and dust and revealed
a portrait, which Brighten Airey held over the cliff
to show the Customs officer, and said:
“ The cave is empty. Nothing remained except
this picture.”
“We thought as much,” replied the officer.
“ Probably the cave was raided soon after old Duval
had hidden his treasure.”
“ Should this picture be submitted to your Gov-
ernment? ” asked the Master.


“What! a painting? ” said the officer. “Keep
it as a memento of your search.”
“I thank you, officer!” said Brighten Airey.
“All aboard!” And the “ Yin-Yang ” proceeded to
New York.
Chih took the panel and, removing dust and dirt,
stood the picture against the central casing in the
middle of the deck. It was a curious piece of work
which Brighten Airey said must be over two hun-
dred years old.
“ More than that,” said Hornblower.
“ Much more,” said Goodspeed. “ The panel
dates from the fifteenth century at least. Boticelli
may have been influenced by it. What is your
opinion?” he said to Chih.
“ The painter of this picture,” replied Chih,
“ knew the style of early Sung, and added to this
his knowledge of Renaissance painting in Italy as
it was expressed in the work of Boticelli. He
worked in tempera, which was familiar at the time,
and to his model gave a form and lines which were
derived from Chinese painting. All shadows and
unnecessary details were eliminated, and the har-
monious flow of his lines produced the work which
is a mingling of the arts of East and West.”
“ In short,” said Goodspeed, “it is a prototype
of Celestion painting to-day.”
“ Only much better done,” added Chih.
“ In your opinion,” said Brighten Airey, “ what
is best to be done with the picture? ”
“ Since our visit to England did not produce any
business exchanges,” replied Chih, “ and expenses
continue, in the light of American energy, and
interest in unusual events, this painting should be


exchanged in New York under the title of ‘A Panel
by the Master of the Unscalable Island.’ ”
“ The Metropolitan Museum in Central Park is
the place for pictures,” said Hornblower, who
knew the United States.
“ New York lies ahead,” called Honeybunn,
from his place at the wheel.
“ What is this? ” exclaimed Brighten Airey.
“Where is New York? ” Not a sky-scraper was
to be seen.
“ Buried,” said Wu, as they flew over an immense
electric sign which read; “Back to Nature.”
And buried it was, as they saw when the “ Yin-
Yang ” stopped over what had been Madison Square
Gardens.
New York was a charming village with villas,
mostly in the Italian taste, surrounded by cottage
gardens filled with flowers and shrubs. At the
intersection of streets Corinthian columns supported
what appeared to be ribbon grass fluttering from
their tops, and which evidently were exhausts for
air from the city below. Small domed buildings
were at the corners, containing elevators, as a
stream of people were moving in and out of them.
These people were clothed in dark blue smocks
adorned with an eagle, surrounded by stars repre-
senting the States, and trousers with red and white
perpendicular stripes. On their heads were round,
black hats, without a brim and encircled with a
band of small golden discs. They were all in a
hurry.
As the “ Yin-Yang ” moved over the top of Fifth
Avenue and descended at the doorway of the
Gallery in Central Park, which remained at ground
level, they saw the fruit of American genius as


applied to Nature. The village was built on top of
sky-scrapers which had been levelled to an even
height. Central Park was surrounded with tiers
of roadways which, as they penetrated the mass of
buildings, were lit with sunlight electric globes,
spreading a light akin to the sun.
“ Move on, there! ’’cried a traffic officer as Chih
stepped out with the panel under his arm. “ This
is no place to park your plane.”
“ This picture,” replied Chih, “ will shed light
on the problem of Nature, and the Director inside
is in a hurry for it.”
“ New York has all the light it wants,” said
the officer, and turned to the traffic.
Chih found the Director in his office, where,
having introduced himself, he propped the painting
on a chair and announced that it was by the
“ Master of the Unscalable Island.” The Director
looked at the panel and listened attentively while
Chih told where it was found, and the circum-
stances. Then he pressed a bell three times and
three experts entered and examined the panel
minutely.
“What do you make of it?’’said the Director.
“ Judging by the subject, it was painted at the
time of Boticelli, but whether by an Italian artist
in China, or a Chinese artist in Italy, we are unable
to say,”
“ However,” said the Director to Chih, “if you
care to let us have the painting, which I think is
exceedingly valuable and rare, may I offer in
exchange anything we have in the States which will
fit into your aeroplane? ”
Chih was taken aback by this offer and expressed
his thanks in confusion.


“ I see,” said the Director, “ that you are unable
to decide, and recommend a consultation with your
partners. But, let me add, there is nothing in the
States of much interest since we returned to Nature.
Come back and tell me your decision.”
When Chih announced the proposed terms of
exchange, Brighten Airey whistled and Goodspeed
was pleased. Then they thought hard and looked
at one another. At the end of eight minutes
Brighten Airey said sorrowfully:
“ There is nothing that we want! ”
“Yes, there is!” said Wu, who was standing
near, and they turned eagerly to the old gardener.
“Nature is never barren,” he said. “The United
States has the best cantaloups in existence.
Exchange your picture for seeds of the latest
varieties.”
Instantly the vision of Celestians regaling them-
selves on superior Rocky Ford melons sent Chih-hu
hastening to the Director. On announcing their
decision, the Director said:
“ Nature is supreme,” and, turning to his tele-
phone, called the Department of Agriculture, which
was on Forty-fifth High Broadway. Presently, he
said:
“As you are returning to Celestion, if you would
kindly call on General Cantaloup, of the Depart-
ment of Agriculture in Los Angeles, he will give
you whatever seed is required.”
Thanking the Director, who reciprocated the
thanks, Chih returned to the “ Yin-Yang ” and
their flight was resumed. It was half-past ten.
“ In the days when capital was counted in terms
of money,” said Brighten Airey, “ collections of


pictures often were made in the United States as a
means of spending it.”
“And some were very good, too,” replied Horn-
blower.
“After leaving Paris,” he continued, “ where, to
tell the truth, my efforts as a painter were not as
successful as those of later days with the horn, a
desire to see the United States brought to light one
of those collections which ended in a comedy of
errors.
“ Mr. Lettuce O. Leaphigh, of Pittsburgh, which
we are passing, formed a collection of El Greco’s
pictures which was of exceptional size. El Greco,
as perhaps you know, was a Spanish painter who
dwelt at Toledo, in a house which was part of the
palace built by the great Spanish Treasurer,
Samuel Ha Levi. Most of the palace was burnt
by the Duque de Escalona, in the reign of Charles
the Fifth, because it had been occupied by the
Constable de Bourbon.
“ Owing to the popularity of El Greco, many
painters in Paris were busy painting pictures attri-
buted to this master, which were the rage, and the
sight of some of these, which I knew, hanging in
collections, appealed as a reminder of serene days
in the Latin Quarter.
“ The collectors of Pittsburgh knew Italy, and
conceived the idea of housing their pictures in
towers similar to those built at San Gimiginano.
These towers were built by wealthy families of the
town, the wealthiest building highest, and the
height was increased as their fortunes grew. In
the fifteenth century it was easy to tell who was
the most prosperous person in San Gimiginano by
the colour of the bricks on the highest tower.


“ So, in Pittsburgh sky-scraper towers were
erected to mark the size of the collections contained
in them. They grew higher and higher, until Let-
tuce O, Leaphigh built one which was more than
a thousand feet in the air and could not be sur-
passed, except with great difficulty in finding old
pictures to fill it. Mr. Leaphigh, however, had
found so many El Grecos that, with admirable
hanging, he was able to fill the walls of every floor.
To view this collection a central elevator was
equipped with plate glass walls through which the
pictures appeared as the elevator moved, and the
visitor, seated in a luxurious lounge, merely pressed
a button to afford a closer inspection when desired.
“ Being justly proud of the height of his collec-
tion, Mr. Lettuce O. Leaphigh generously threw
open his El Grecos to public inspection, when
M. Anatole France, of Paris, declared that the
painter was astigmatic. The value of his collection
immediately fell and the pictures were no longer
fashionable. M. Anatole France based his accusa-
tion on the size of El Greco’s heads. They were
very small, and often in the proportion of a pimple
on a pumpkin.”
In China, said Chih, “ Buddhas have large
ears as a sign of intelligence. Perhaps El Greco
painted small heads to express a lack of it, or,
more likely, to show superior modesty, as swollen
heads is a term applied to inferior persons who
suffer from pride and vanity.”
The discussion was ended by announcing
that luncheon was served, after which, as they were
dozing on the deck, Heaviside appeared and said:
“ Los Angeles and the Pacific are in sight.”


“What length of time has this flight taken?”
Chih asked.
“ Three hours,” said Brighten Airey, as he went
to the wheel. “We left New York at half-past ten,
and it is now half-past ten by the clock on the
Post Office.”
The “ Yin-Yang ” descended in Pershing Square,
where, not wishing to disturb the people in the
garden, a rope ladder was lowered from the stern
doorway and Chih landed. Under the bamboos
many were reading the morning paper, and amongst
them were several Chinese. And the buildings
round the Square were of a small height, some with
ugly facades in the North European style, and some
with T’ang style roofs.
Asking for General Cantaloup, of the Department
of Agriculture, Chih was directed to a building
across the Square, where he was received by an
elderly man to whom he stated his mission.
“ The message came over the telephone this
morning,” said the General, “ and the seed is here.”
He produced a small sack which contained, he said,
forty-eight varieties of the latest cantaloups. “If
you require more, you are welcome to them.”
Chih expressed his thanks to the General, who,
he said, had provided ample.
“ Overlooking the impertinence of this stranger, ’
Chih said, “ are you named after the cantaloup, or
the cantaloup after you.”
“O! ” said the General, “my name came from
the Revolution. You may have noticed a statue on
the Square of my ancestor, General Cantaloup. It
was this way:
“After the Battle of Casuba the revolutionary
forces, who were known as the Melons, retired


under their General. No food could be found on
their retreat except cantaloups, which were taken
for breakfast with the dew on them. Every
morning the cook said: ‘ Sir! what for breakfast
this morning?’ And the General replied; ‘ Canta-
loup.’
“At last they reached the home of Colonel Honey
Dew, at Rocky Ford, in the Persian Plain. Next
morning at breakfast, the Colonel asked the General
what he would take. ‘ Cantaloup,’ he replied, and,
not wishing to appear disrespectful, all followed his
lead, noticing how good it was to start with canta-
loup.
“ Thus the custom was established, and when
peace was declared a statue of the General was
erected on Pershing Square to commemorate his
services in starting breakfast with cantaloup.”
“It was a very honourable deed,” said Chih.
“ There is nothing better in the United States.”


CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
WHEREIN TRAGEDY ENTERS AND HOLLYWOOD
DISAPPEARS IN THE “ BURNING OF ROME,”
WHICH IS RELIEVED BY THE “ BLUE OF HEA-
VEN,” ONLY TO FIND THAT THE PHOENIX, THE
GOOSE, AND THE EAGLE, BIRDS OF THE
PACIFIC, ARE AS NAUGHT BEFORE THE RUK
WHICH DESTROYS THE SCIENCE OF INDUSTRY
AT HONOLULU AND LEAVES THE WAY CLEAR
FOR THE SPIRIT OF THE SOUTH.
HURRY FIFTY was eager to see Hollywood,
where the last studio in the world remained
for making moving pictures. Suggesting a visit,
to Brighten Airey, who agreed that a change to
land would be good for all, when Chih returned
with a sack of melon seeds, the “ Yin-Yang ” was
flown across to Hollywood, which lay beside Los
Angeles.
The day was hot, and the movie stars in the
arena, where all the films were staged, moved about
with perspiration streaming through their paint.
Posters announced the “ Burning of Rome,” and
the scene was laid as a classical forum. From the
air, fronts of temples were strutted at the back with
pine beams, and groups of people were playing
poker in the shade of one side while Roman citizens
performed on the other.
Landing at the aerodrome, which lay nearby,
Goodspeed said that he would remain in charge,
while Wu wished to get some cantaloups in the
village for their lunch, and Brighten Airey, with
the crew and Chih—who took Chang for exercise—
proceeded to see the “ Burning of Rome” in course


of construction. “ No Charge for Admittance ” was
printed over the gate, and they entered, taking seats
where a handful of sightseers were gathered in
silent weariness watching the performance.
Elsewhere, in most of the world, plays were acted
in the open air, theatres being constructed with
tiers of seats on sloping sides of hills, and the stage
had a colonnade as a background, through which,
where possible, the sea gave a distance of blue
space. The charm of voices uttering words of wis-
dom, or comedy, with skilful acting in symmetrical
surroundings, had long since supplanted the mech-
anical photographs and reproduced words which
achieved their zenith at Hollywood.
“Rome burns!” exclaimed a large, exceedingly
fat actor in the part of Nero.
“ Start the smoke! ” called the Chief, through his
megaphone, and clouds of smoke rolled across
Rome, as seen through the colonnade of the terrace
where Nero stood mopping the perspiration from
his face as well as he could without disturbing his
make-up. Nero was in a bad temper.
“Where is your fiddle? Play up, Nero!” said
the Director, caustically. “ It’s too damned hot! ”
replied the Emperor, as a centurion brought him a
fiddle, and with the sweat dripping from his nose
he walked to the colonnade and began playing.
“ Hold her! ” cried the Director. “ Keep those don-
keys back!” he yelled, as several asses appeared
which were used to provide milk for the bath of the
Empress. But the asses charged through the
Roman citizens, followed by shouts of “ Fire! ” A
spark had kindled the scene and flames shot up
from the combustible materials of ancient Rome.
Swiftly a panic followed, when scene-shifters and


Roman citizens mingled in a race for the entrance,
and confusion reigned.
“ Fix that pose, Nero! ” called a camera operator,
who saw opportunities for his art in the panic, as
he focussed the Emperor, who was standing aghast.
Even as he spoke, one of the asses came through
the colonnade in a maddened rush and upset Nero,
who fell heavily on the back of his head. The flames
spread rapidly and the terrace caught fire, with the
result that Nero lay alone on the blazing imitation
marble.
“We had better get him out of that,” said
Brighten Airey, as with the Four H. men and Chih
he led the way. Chang heard, and knew what was
wanted. He dashed ahead and, seizing Nero with
his trunk, hauled him out of danger. As they
looked at the Emperor stretched before them, a
centurion approached and said:
“ Cyrus Y. Bunk is in a bad way.”
“Hurry Fifty glanced at the centurion, whose
face-dressing had run down his tunic, and cried:
“ Ginger George! ” It was the Hon. George Drink-
water, from Manila.
“Hullo!” he said, bending over Nero to loosen
his red silk toga, “ that pearl of yours could not
be found. O gemini! ”he exclaimed, as he exposed
Nero’s chest. There on a string tried round his neck
was the black pearl. Lifting the Emperor’s head,
he let it fall.
“ His neck is broken,” he said. Then he snapped
the string and handed the pearl to Hurry Fifty.
“ Lift him up! ” said Brighten Airey, and the Four
H. men bore the body to the gate.
As they went, the Hon, George Drinkwater said
to Hurry;


“ Cyrus Y. Bunk flew with me, to act on the
talkies, the next day from Manila, where he was a
favourite of the stout lady who rolled on you. That
is where he received the pearl.”
At the gate firemen were coming in as they
laid Nero down and turned to help. But the flames
had spread and the studio was doomed.
“ There goes my last occupation,” said the Hon.
George Drinkwater. “ The picture business is
finished. Now I shall have to dwell in the ‘ House
of the Hundred Broken Hearts.’ ”
“ Never mind! ” said Hurry, “ take this.” And he
slipped the black pearl into the centurion’s hand.
“ It is time we were off, or we shall be called as
witnesses,” said Brighten Airey, leading the way
back to the aerodrome.
As the “Yin-Yang” rose and they sat down
to lunch, the second of that day, it was twelve
o’clock. Wu had obtained cantaloups, peaches and
ice cream in Hollywood, and stuffed the halved
melons with crushed peach, covered with ice cream,
serving a dish which delighted all.
“ Is the cantaloup a native of the United States? ”
asked Brighten Airey.
Silence followed; nobody knew!
After lunch, all except those on duty went to
sleep in the deck chairs, until Heaviside called
Hurry to take the wheel.
How blue the Pacific is,” Heaviside remarked,
is he took the chair which Hurry left.
“ Not so blue as the heavens,” said Honeybunn.
“ Perhaps not,” replied Heaviside, “ but what
gives the heavens their tint? ”
“ That was solved by a steeplejack,” said Honey-
bunn.


“Alfred Sidebottom was repairing the spire of
Salisbury Cathedral, when he discovered the cause
of the blue of heaven. He was a steeplejack, and,
secured by a rope, sat at the top of the steeple
engaged in pointing the joints of the stones where
they were fretted. From this position he could see
over Salisbury and the countryside around, and as
he worked his eye fell on the railway station, where
an express train was approaching at top speed.
Within a moment the engine jumped the rails and
crashed into a platform. Instantly the train was
piled up, and as the steeplejack watched he fainted
at the sight. Fortunately, he was secured by the
rope tried round his waist, and hung at the top of
the steeple.
“ While unconscious, by sub-conscious sight he
saw the souls of passengers, as they died, leaving
the bodies and floating in the air. The souls were
in a state of equilibrium, and with slight undula-
tions were carried by a gentle breeze towards the
Cathedral. Each of these souls was enclosed in a
small cloud of greyish-white psychic force, and was
blown along until it came into contact with a house,
or a telegraph pole, when it slowly rose. Clearing
the houses, the souls were blown to the Cathedral,
where, on reaching the walls, they ascended more
rapidly towards the spire. It was evident that
heavenly gravitation was attracting them, and the
gravity of earth held them back at a low altitude.
“Ascending the spire, the souls began to revolve
round the stonework at a faster and faster pace
until, reaching the top, they shot upwards with a
spiral movement at great speed. As they passed
the steeplejack the grey-white souls had become
blue-grey, and his last sight of them in the upper


air was as puffs of blue, a delicate blue, the blue of
heaven.
“ When Alfred Sidebottom awoke he was a
changed steeplejack. Hitherto a Presbyterian, he
was convinced now that churches with spires are
the most desirable, and became an Anglican with
a mission. Believing that spires act as conductors
of souls to heaven, just as lightning rods conduct
thunderbolts to earth, he sought to convince people
dwelling in the neighbourhood of steeples that their
chances of reaching heaven were better than those
who dwelt near spreading roofs, and the best
chances of all were given to the Anglicans, who
have most spires. He urged the necessity of build-
ing tall thoroughfares to heaven, wherever he went.
“No one paid heed to his preaching, a few
pointing out that England had an abundance, and,
hearing of Celestion, he came and spread his mis-
sion of the spires. There were none in Celestion.
Pointing out that, in consequence, the souls of
Celestians would be left floating in the middle air,
he became depressed when his remarks were treated
with indifference.
“ But he persevered, and in the end became a
gardener with a mission of planting cypress trees,
up which, Alfred Sidebottom declared, Celestian
souls would ascend to the blue of heaven.”
In China,” said Chih, “ sometimes souls ascend
to heaven on the back of a crane, but usually they
are in no hurry to leave the earth. Their friends
and relatives are assured that they will not depart
in a hurry because the only tall buildings are pago-
das, which have layers of wide, down-spreading
eaves to check the ascent of departing souls as
long as possible.”


“ Sidebottom,” said Heaviside, “ was doubtless
so named because he presented his bottom side to
the world. If the steeplejack had gone to China
might he not have persuaded the people to build a
few steeples, even if only for the sake of the few
who were anxious to reach the blue of heaven with-
out delay.”
Chih smiled and said;
“It is often necessary to preserve illusions.
Truth is not always desirable. Nevertheless, if the
steeplejack had built a steeple in China, people
would have said that it was like scolding a eunuch
for not growing a beard. Knowledge, although the
beginning of sorrow, is the wing by which we fly
to heaven.”
“And wings,” said Brighten Airey, “abound
round the Pacific. On the smocks of China is the
phoenix, of Celestion the goose, while the United
States has the eagle.”
“Before us,” said Wu, who joined the group
from the bow, “is the greatest bird of all the
Ruk.”
An enormous bird was perched on top of the
volcanic mountain at Honolulu. As they looked at
it each turned to the other, and in their eyes was
uneasiness. So big was the bird that the mountain
on which it stood seemed like a hillock.
“ Is this bird known in China? ” said Goodspeed.
“lt was,” replied Chih. “In the beginning,
according to mythology, the Ruk established the
seasons in China, and from time to time came and
taught the people how to work creatively. For
more than two thousand years tales of its
appearances have added to its size, and the Ruk


became a bird of thirty thousand li across its out-
spread wings.
“ But the Ruk became a fable, and the people
forgot how to perform their greatest task. The
sight of the bird now affects me profoundly.
“As it does all of us,” added Brighten Airey.
Flying nearer, they saw that the Ruk was asleep.
Its head was tucked under a wing, and its three red
legs seemed immovable. The bird faced due south,
and the red of its feathers was more profound than
the heavens at sunset.
Built up from the mountain top were huge steel
pylons with intricate machinery installed, and
attached to the wings of the bird. And each of its
legs was secured with three stanchions of steel,
anchored to the rock. A notice board in front of
the legs announced that all rights were the pro-
perty of the United States of America, and elec-
trical power would be available when the bird
began to flap its wings, working six hours of the
day, under the direction of George P. Titmouse.
Down the mountain sides were, first an electrical
generating station, and then many factories and
workshops, the Ruk being expected to provide
power to operate all.
It was opening day. A procession was advancing
from the base of the mountain, with a band at the
head playing the “ Star Spangled Banner.” Then
came a large sign, slung on poles, reading: “ Return
to Nature.” Officials, manufacturers, workers and
sightseers followed to the ceremony at the summit.
The “ Yin-Yang ” was poised near the Ruk, when
Chih said: “The bird of creativeness cannot be
harnessed by men, whose science is doomed. It
would be better to move out of the way.”


“You are probably right,” said Brighten Airey,
and he took the plane down by the sea, where they
watched the ceremony and the sleeping Ruk.
Mounting a platform erected on the toes of the
bird, the chief dignitary, whom Hurry declared was
the President, having delivered his address, turned
to a switch, which was draped with flags, and
applied the current from the town to a red leg of
the bird. All looked to see if the harnessed Ruk
would respond.
A shiver passed over the red feathers and its
head shot forth, while the elegant tail reared into
the sky with a rush of wind, and the Ruk relieved
itself. Then the crested head, poised on a sinuous
neck, with golden eyes surrounded by a pattern of
deep blue feathers, swooped down to its legs and,
seizing a stanchion in its bill, plucked it from the
bolts and tossed the steel into the town at the foot
of the mountain, scattering the people round its
feet like chaff before a storm. Swiftly the
remaining stanchions were thrown aside, and then,
with a slight bend of its body the wings were
raised, lifting the steel attachments as easily as if
they were snowflakes. The wings flapped sharply
and the air was filled with flying girders and bolts,
and engineers and spectators disappeared, blown
into the distance. On the side of the mountain,
factories collapsed, buildings in the town tottered,
and the ” Yin-Yang” over the harbour, swayed
in the rush of air. The Ruk stretched forth its head
and silently flew towards the south, vanishing like
a cloud, leaving a shadow on the sea marking its
swift flight.


As the “ Yin-Yang ” rose all showed relief, and
Chih said:
“ The Spirit of the North Pole arranges the time
of death, and of the South Pole the time of birth.
The Ruk has gone to the south, whence a new
civilization will arise.”
It was half-past twelve by the clock on the Post
Office, which had stopped.


CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
WHEREIN THE SUPREME ULTIMATE IS RELIEVED
BY CHANG O, GODDESS OF THE MOON, AND
THE “GREAT ERUPTION” IS FOLLOWED BY
PERFECT TRANQUILLITY IN THE BIRTH OF NEW
THOUGHT.
SILENCE fell on the “ Yin-Yang ”as they flew
to Celestion. All were silent because the Ruk
had shown the problem which faced the world, and
they knew that their part was to light the way.
And if they failed the Ruk would scatter them like
useless husks before a cleansing wind. Humanity
was more important than any part of it. Could
their part fulfil the demand which Nature had
placed upon them?
The silence was broken when Brighten Airey,
who was sitting with his head in his hands, turned
to Chih-hu and said:
“ Do you believe in God? ”
All men do,” replied Chih. “ God, as most
Europeans call the Supreme Ultimate —as He is
known in China —or Nature, or whatever name
He is given, is the force which compels humanity
to move onwards. Through the centuries of the
past many peoples, usually dwelling in warm cli-
mates, have failed to move and have gone out of
existence. It is customary with Christian peoples
to imagine that God has pity. The pity which they
attribute to God is their own. To a Chinese, the
Supreme Ultimate is without pity, and is concerned
with affairs which are beyond the power of man
to understand. Therefore, Confucius said: ‘Treat
with respect all spiritual beings, but keep them at


a distance.’ So the Christian places God well away
from earth.
“ The riddle of the universe cannot be penetrated.
Yet it moves steadily forward. Races may dis-
appear while others assume the lead, and the pur-
pose is always the same.
“ European conflicts between Protestants and
Catholics, with Jews looking on, convinced of a
faith superior to both, and Mohammedans aloof
from all, have not interested the Chinese. To a
Chinese mind, the spectacle of Russia destroying
her Christian churches and proclaiming that no
god exists, is foolish. The Communist is as devout
in his belief as were the Christians before him.
And he is unconsciously obeying the will of the
Supreme Ultimate, doing his utmost to spread that
which he believes is best for humanity, the same
as other races with energy have done. Being a
northern people, his ideas are primitive and are not
creative, and therefore cannot lead humanity.
“ In China, the Supreme Ultimate is not wor-
shipped in the sense that Christians worship God.
He is regarded as supreme and above the small
affairs of individuals, such as the disputes and
wrangles of humanity about its particular divinity.
Consequently, China is a land where one is free to
worship as one chooses. No god is held superior
to another. The only religious practice which has
been enforced is to prohibit the followers of any
one creed trying to force their beliefs on others.
All are free to convert as many as will listen, but
not to condemn or abuse those who have other
ideas. And above all is the belief in the Supreme
Ultimate; above all petty distinctions and religious
prejudices.


“ Law is the Supreme Ultimate in the universe.
And the law of Chinese philosophy is Love,
Righteousness, Reverence and Wisdom, all in har-
mony. Love is creative, the originating power of
the universe; Righteousness is service to one’s
neighbour, or man; Reverence is Love’s expression
in humility and selflessness; and Wisdom is the
reserve of knowledge in man. It was Chu Hsi who
said that Heaven is law. And Confucius before him
said: ‘While nothing is known about life, it is
impossible to know about death.’
“ Perhaps a day will come when humanity works
together, and many difficulties of race, language
and habits have disappeared, placing man in a
higher position than he has known. Then, perhaps,
knowledge will come of the Supreme Ultimate and
His purpose.
“ In the meantime, the Four Intelligent Creatures
the Ch’i-lin, the Phoenix, the Dragon and the
Tortoise—have behaved more reasonably than man.
And the Reconciler of Celestion, whose task has
been to stop antagonism between various creeds,
is worthy of a place beside Chang Nang, Superin-
tendent of Guests in the Han dynasty.”
“And what is your belief?” said the Master,
turning to Wu Chih.
“ Being a simple cook with a love of gardening,”
replied Wu, “ Chang O suffices to fill my heart
with adoration.”
“Then you love the moon!” exclaimed Brighten
Airey.
“ Yes! but Chang O is not the moon as you know
her. She is the moon which poets love.
“ Two hundred years ago, Yuan Mei, the old
Rose Master of Nanking, finished his lines to


Chang O, Goddess of the Moon, by candle light at
a table on which stood a bowl of Pekinese white
lilac. He was the last of the great poets of China
and loved to tend his garden while he thought of
his verse.
“ Outside, in the garden, trees were bending over
the southern wall, and the scent of thyme and
alyssum, jasmine and roses, blown through the open
window, mingled with the fragrance from the bowl
on the table. He blew out the candle and lay down
to sleep.
“ It was a lovelily night, the thirteenth of the
eighth month, when Chang O sometimes descends
and grants desires to those who await her coming.
Chang O, peeping from the cinnamon bushes in the
moon, saw the verses lying on the table. Then, like
a falling star, she shot to earth, brushing the top-
most leaf of the tallest tree in her descent. Alight-
ing on the window sill, she entered the room and
sat on the table reading the poet’s lines. They
pleased her. So she tickled the nose of the poet
and said:‘Dost thou love me?’ And Yuan Mei
replied: ‘ Every man has his special failing, and
the feeling which the sight of you arouses is for
ever mine.’ ‘ Poets,’ she said, ‘ have been my lovers
since the world began. When the earth is hidden
and the moon is lost, a star is born, fathered by a
poet. Every star in the heavens marks the song
of a voice which cannot grow dim. From East and
West star poets watch me, with a welcoming smile,
peeping from the new moon.
There was one poet who was like no other.
He sat in a boat on Tun-ting Lake, writing his
verses to my reflection on the water. We loved,
and so great was the attraction that, on my looking


back from the moon Li Po leapt from the boat,
trying to embrace a reflection.’
“At the coming of dawn, Chang O, rising to leave
before the morning sun could melt her charms, and
seeing that her lover was distressed, asked what
ailed him. And he replied: ‘ Your fairness is like
the purest crystal; your loveliness pervades the
starry night; but, alas! you have no fragrance! ’
“ ‘ There is no fragrance in the moon,’ she said,
‘ save that of the cinnamon, and none in me.’ In
a fit of petulance she upset the bowl of lilac and
her eyes filled with tears, which tinkled as they fell
into the empty bowl.
‘ O foolish poet! ’ she cried, *no new star will
shine in the heavens because you love with your
nose! ’
“ Yuan Mei sadly gathered the fallen flowers and
replaced them in the bowl with her tears. ‘And
now,’ she sobbed, ‘ my eyes will be red, and when
wet with tears the moon shines faintly.’
“ The poet took the lilac with the tear-drops
clinging, and dried her eyes while the tears, now
scent-laden, pattered on her breasts. And the
fragrance remained as Chang O, smiling now, flew
back to the moon.
“ Ever since the scent of white lilac perfumes the
air when the moon shines brightly, which, per-
chance, is better than a star in heaven.”
“And your tale of Chang O,” said Brighten Airey,
“ has a flavour which is better than the confusion
of our thoughts.”
“ Perhaps that is why Wu told it,” said Good-
speed, as Chih came on deck and said:
“ Our destination is the Green Goose Inn, on


Kurrajong Mountain, where SenorTortue will join
us in the morning.”
As the “ Yin-Yang ” passed over Celestion the
time, by an aerial clock on Flagstaff Hill, was half-
past three. The journey from Honolulu had taken
exactly six hours, allowing for the difference in
time, which made Celestion three-and-a-half hours
earlier.
“ It is good to see civilization again,” said Honey-
bunn, looking down at the clock, which was planted
with numerals in white alyssum on a green lawn
with alyssum hands above, of trough shape,
attached to the works at the centre, and set to face
the cardinal points of the compass.
“ Back to Nature,” said the Master, gaily.
Renor Greetwell, of the Green Goose Inn, which
lay on the side of the mountain amidst orange
groves, made them welcome, and that evening, be-
fore a blazing fire, joined in the talk.
The publican was an old man, who remembered
the days before Celestion blossomed.
“ The Great Eruption occurred when I was a lad,”
he said. “A distant murmur was the first sound.
People in the street looked at the sky and a crowd
came running towards the quay. Then the Post
Office tower crashed to the ground and bodies lay
everywhere. ‘A wave is coming,’ someone said,
‘ which looks like lava. It is a stream of yellow-
brown on top and red underneath, swamping all in
its course.’
“ I was caught in the crush and carried to the
Wool Exchange corner, where, clambering on top
of a red pillar-box, a refuge was found. Presently
the rush eased, and I made my way to the Domain
n 209


and the National Art Gallery. Beyond lay Wool-
loomooloo, once a hollow, now filled with the lava,
which overflowed into the Domain and the southern
end of the Gallery collapsed, destroying the
European art contained on that side of the collec-
tion. Slowly the crowd were forced back past the
Library, which was engulfed in the following lava.
Once more I sought refuge on the pillar-box, and
sat as on an island in the throng. This cast-iron
receptacle of literature, a symbol of British thought,
would be the last to perish.
“ Through the night, which was pitch-black, the
crash of falling structures was terrifying, and the
slow-moving stream below me was rising higher
and higher, yet towards morning I fell asleep.
“Awakening, a clear blue sky above was cheering,
and as I looked around all the architecture had
fallen, but the pillar-box was still secure, half-buried
in the flood. Not a soul could be seen, all having
retreated save those who were buried. Lowering
my foot, the lava proved too hot to stand upon, so
I sat on the pillar-box and waited. Late that after-
noon, a sail appeared and answered to my call.
As it came near, sliding and bumping on wide iron
runners which were attached to the hull, and pushed
along by men with poles, helped by the sails, the
name painted on the bow was the ‘ New Era.’ They
hauled me into the boat, where other rescued people
were gathered, and making for the harbour, slipped
off the iron carriage and sailed up the river.
“ Thus I found my way to the Kurrajong, and in
course of time saw the city cleared and rebuilt,
although much reduced in size. And here, in the
Green Goose Inn, I attend to the wishes of my
customers.


“ Coming,” called Renor Greetwell, in answer
to a voice from the bar, and vanished.
“ That story,” said Goodspeed, “is the passing
of the British mind in Australia before the flood of
Oriental thought. European art goes first, followed
by literature, but the pillar-box remained, a symbol
of British thought, bound in cast iron and
indestructible.”
As he uttered these words Wu came through the
doorway. He had slipped away while the publican
was telling his story. A smile lit up his face, and
Brighten Airey said:
“ What have you been doing, Renor Cook, to
make you look so happy? ”
“Pi Po has gone,” replied Wu. “He has been
fretful since we left Scotland. The claims of Nature
had to be satisfied, so when a lady opossum
appeared in a eucalyptus growing near the “ Yin-
Yang,” Pi Po wished ‘ good-bye ’ and left to take
up his duties in rearing a family. He will sleep
well to-morrow.”
“And we to-night,” said Brighten Airey.
The sun rose, shedding a warm light over the
river at their feet and the plain beyond. There is
no spot on the earth where tranquillity more pro-
found rejoices the watcher who revels in the quiet
of a windless day over the Hawkesbury Bottoms.
After breakfast, all sat on the terrace in front of
the Green Goose Inn and basked in the winter sun-
shine. Presently, Goodspeed, followed by Chih-hu
with Chang in attendance, went towards the river.
Hidden nearby a thrush sang, recalling long ago
when men dwelt in harmony with Nature. To stop
and listen to birds’ songs was an instinct. It was
resisted. To-day, men are foreigners amongst birds.


Would it not be better to linger and rejoice with
the thrush?
River oaks bordered the river. Their dark reflec-
tions were broken by blue waves which spread from
circles where fish leaped in sunlight. Beside the
Kurrajong Bridge a cumulus cloud was mirrored
in water which lay blue between golden sandbanks.
Across the river, flat land, known as Hawkesbury
Bottoms, spread to Richmond Church. Covered
with tall maize stalks, whose golden grain lay in
husks now faded and dead, the Bottoms contained
a farm-house surrounded by acacia trees in winter
leaflessness. And beyond the farm-house rose a
tall cypress, beside a lagoon hidden by water-
hyacinths.
Through fields of maize, a road twisted in silent
peace. No traffic came that way. When night pro-
vided cover a spider had spun his web from the
four-railed fence to a tall maize stalk. At dawn,
an insect, which may have been a grasshopper, had
broken this web and a faint breeze at sunrise had
carried a thread to the centre of the road, where it
lay level with an eye. All day it would lie gently
undulating in that perfect tranquillity, sinking
nearer to earth.
Beyond Richmond Church rose smoke from an
engine shunting trucks. The engine stopped puffing
behind the trucks, which ran on. So with thoughts
on reading a book. The writer is an engine, and
the thoughts of readers are the trucks. They con-
tinue. And men’s minds are like cobwebs, breaking
from their birthplace into the world, and then
undulating in the lower air, until sinking into dust.
Down by the river Chih-hu sat on a log, and
wrote with a pencil and paper. At the end of an


hour Goodspeed approached and apologised for
intruding.
“No matter,” said Chih, tearing his paper to
shreds and throwing it down amongst other torn
sheets. “It won’t come right. The union of East
and West in literature is as far-off as ever.”
“You are wrong, friend Chih!’’said Goodspeed.
“ The effort which you make is a sign of new
thought dawning. And the style which you cannot
achieve will come when words flow from one to
the other in everyday thoughts.”
“ That may be,” replied Chih, “ but it is the
writer’s task to prepare the way.”
“ Which is what you are doing,” said Goodspeed.
Chang Li Heng flickered his ear, and Wu said
from the bank above them:
“ Senor Tortue is calling.”




Fjobart:
J. Walch Sc Sons Pty. I/td.,
130 Macquarie Street.








J <5OB 0084677] 9


r -- ,C.--'~-- t3 . . ‘ : . Ja - -•»—
Pv; _._ . r>jfcr - • ~ m rr - • -cxtaew
wviiwf . ‘ ~ i - _• __
"** . - ... ! *' :: 4 rt* v “ -
• V*i»4j. : " ?
«• — ~rrT" —
'«“•■«■ - M.i- v; »a3£_
-’ll- ~ - " nm,^?,^.:-‘ r ‘ k *?* : .co.j.u.-e-a
- —— i -?er ~”i< l|n h: — : --•■ j -. r- j ,-^j
- : —•■- ; " J£ -- —»r ■■
.».-im- ■ -.1 *£..; - 3 <S* t . 3 5 ~. -• __ -&.. - S*= -
.' ijcr ■ • »»*=■=•.• ., -Jjuis'.,.. "”■■ zSl - ■ -” ---• ■ r :. —T~~ • ' — .- '--
■•>=«■“ ■ ZjS -- ' : S. J 1 —- "
< - • ~ aw: • _ rr? - n .T:, ~' a T=? c: ~- . .-■ . ‘ 9 T*~ : 'J. - '
“~T '••.-.=-’=g“ar.r- : -^*982®*®^" —-' • — |)1 c^-^
'*•■■■ ,.-_ZT ~ r - *: r" 1 -— _-r-.-~- — •■ - J -■”* - •‘Sr :s--. ->:• i J —.s- —-
—:'*?,*_;*• r~~** g .«- :. _. ■■««-*«- ...
■ >• *: S*r ’-’ ...*•• •••"*•- . , ,r- . ■ "Si:
-■ __ .'. *, — -
rjffigyjEl-: — .S ■, .,., JSJ .. ■ -?5Sf?° ' :— K 'TfriiT*-~ :. rr
'js*. ;T; au«i". '^Sfg=:^ gB uggj - =■— ■*• ■ *=*-=«?":; ■
•■"•*■ :. • •>»“ — : - • -afrS- ■ •—- JITT^r
i ■: • -•-, ■
•, . . JS- 5r , ■- ?* ” - ■- — “.:3ii;r -..j. -===■ ■ -»■;.: “ _ ■
*•*■•■-- . c<mp« — - — 8 ;:•• ■ ■ -“ap 1 . " ■ ■■-- - ■ -aws.. !!«••« „._
— - -S3 - - • I«,r- "rI. — - - — -«<■ '1 • - ****-«r-3._ _
■ ":; • ■ ~iiz:£ry . --- =r »>•«■ -y
• rgryS- gagi — •**»•“»* ~ ~
. fijfrzrhr: ’" ■'?,'*?■ S*- — ' • rg?. *"-- •~^ Jtt: ~ -■ ■ ’ ir%; -r"" ■ • ■ V_‘
_ •■ _.!!'■■’* s ~ : ".:ai> l " F ■ - - ‘* i *‘
r V7'.r; - -jac r.-.nr.- ’ ji.V'or-' l> - zii r-i*-' ' '-'tHtt? - .*, : '*^1
— • ‘*y■»»*»* -• ■ ■ |j|~ilsaftK'.. * -~o - ” -— w^# r 1 *** ■
' ..:■ ‘ ■ ■ ’ -r ■ -==™=- ■ .. ■“*" •
SSS»gr' ‘ J: . . r t^!g§gg?jjg-r^
-“*“=■■■ . :i?2 » ' " ,jr ~'~ ..-"-'.Vniu; -
lflMr • -•’»*■ ~ •***- ~ J ’ - “*r r iTin t — —sH 1
'- . .■ -'*J§-- IT: ”'"
* “ - . — „ _ ■*«»» • • ' f— »- 1 .!_ .—• • j.: - ■ ■ | ■'-< -~i- • .i, ,i -
•<_ • ■• —--. _-a::«. — *♦ 2 rr <.srTtrs-*n*a.’ ... - • •«, ;n;&-' ■
girf:r^ E -r:“‘ *— ■ ... ■ r •
• S^f'
__ : » ’.. :SS^--:- -‘-r -- - **r»S -
§L JUT** --' i.n’ ■ ■• - - - ■« _jin* , fi ,<lt ' :•*'- . ~.ia * " . — ■'-” -*-
tc-jw*-- - - — . --«•.•**•■ ----- 5V3*s** ,v» . . .**' r — .±. . ■*■* ■» , ; .
:: -V- . - .7 f/Sk- -•■' -g|
- . '"1,7 ; -d 4 *-;- ~ ~ - ?~zc 3.ajpS- : ~ ■--::' :-- ■«y #t '.,..:
g r ? ’ :j . - - >»S‘M:
*rr "*<*■; »• ._i -_r.-sa»--^* • - .r M —. __ _:: u ~i- ~^ywpWßer^r;
» jyi^.-I." _I - • 1 ■ tgr jj: ■ —1 • •;-■•- ■ ; -_d— — =t * v l ' L *' u » IOT 3 •
