

ALLIED GEOGRAPHICAL SECTION
Southwest Pacific Area
YOU
AND THE NATIVE
Notes for the Guidance of
Members of the Forces in their
Relations with
New Guinea Natives
12th February, 1943


ALLIED GEOGRAPHICAL SECTION
Southwest Pacific Area
YOU
AND THE NATIVE
Notes for the Guidance of
Members of the Forces In their
Relations with
New Guinea Natives
12th February, 1943


G. S.W.P.A.,
12th February, 1943
Published for the information of all concerned
By command of General MacARTHUR
H. K. SUTHERLAND
Major General, U.S.A.
Chief of Staff
OFFICIAL:
B. M. FITCH,
Colonel, A.G.D.,
Adjutant General


YOU AND THE NATIVE
OUR POTENTIAL ALLIES
1. The natives are a very important factor in the military
situation. Their goodwill may decide whether we win or
lose the Battle of New Guinea.
2. The natives are used to us, as white men; they feel we
belong, whereas the Japanese are in every respect strangers.
Natives don't* like strangers. Therefore, their natural inclination
is to side with us.
3. We are mighty lucky to start with this advantage. (It would
certainly take a very long time to win without it). It is our
business now to use the advantage properly and see that we
keep it. Remember that with improper use it is always possible
to lose it.
4. Another reason why the native sides with us is that he prefers
our manners to those of the enemy. We shall have therefore
to remember our manners, never descending to the level of the
Japanese.
5. Remember that the natives are our real or potential allies.
Keep on the right side of them.
THE NATIVE AS A HUMAN BEING
6. The native is nearly, if not quite, as good a man as you are.
Don't underrate his intelligence. The big difference is that
you and your forefathers have had better opportunities.
7. At any rate he plays a good game on his home ground. He
shows up better than you do in the tropical forest or the sago-
swamp. In New Guinea bushcraft, in hardihood, in mobility, he
leaves you standing.


8. Don't believe it when you are told he has the mentality of
a child. That is rubbish. An adult native is an adult. He
has a grown-up mind, grown-up feelings, and grown-up dignity.
Respect them all.
9. A great authority (Sir Hubert Murray, Governor of Papua
for more than 30 years) reached the conclusion that natives
were mostly "gentlemen," meaning that they had regard for
other people's feelings. It is up to us to play the gentleman also.
10. At any rate the native is an ordinary human being. You
have to treat him with the proper amount of tact if you
want to get good service out of him.
THE ATTITUDE OF SUPERIORITY
11. The native has always looked up to the white man. He
admires him because of the marvellous things that white
men at large can do —make electric torches, fly in aeroplanes,
etc. You may not be marvellous yourself, but he will think you
are, merely because you are one of the white race.
12. He is also rather afraid of the white men, with all the power
of their civilisation behind them. Therefore he is rather
Worth Acting
Up To
afraid of you.
13. It is not too much to say that he stands
in awe of us. He thinks we are superior
beings. We may not all deserve this reputa-
tion, but it is worth acting up to.
14. Always therefore maintain, your position
or pose of superiority, even if you some-
times have doubts about it. It is flattering
to the vanity and in the circumstances must
pay us well. As for the native, he will
not resent it, because he has brought it
about himself and he is used to it.


CONDUCT TOWARDS NATIVES IN GENERAL
15. Do not, however, ride the high horse over him. Act rather
as if you were his superior, but only slightly his superior.
16. Don't bully him. It would be too easy. You are 11 or 12
stone to his 8; you can use your fists and he knows nothing
of that; and you have a rifle and bayonet of which he is
naturally much afraid. It would, therefore, be, to say the least,
unsporting.
17. Another reason why you should not bully him is that he
will not like it, and therefore you will not get the best
service out of him.
18. Don't curse and swear at him
either. He detests that, and
it is not a fair go, for if he dares
to answer you back you will call
it insolence, and proceed to
stronger measures. Remember that
it is insolence to swear at a man
in the first place.
19. And don't make fun of him
unless he is at least partly
in the joke.
20. Joke with him by all means;
even lark with him. He likes
it as much as you do. But while
you play the fool don't forget
that you have to maintain that
pose of superiority. Don't go too
far.
Don’t Curse and Swear
21. Don't deliberately descend to his level. He has not been
used to that from the white man; he will consider it unfitting
and think less of you.


22. Don't clasp him round the neck. Brotherhood is all right.
But don't act like a twin brother. Be very much the big
brother.
23. Always, without overdoing it, be the master. The time
may come when you will want a native to obey you. He
won’t obey you if you have been in the habit of treating him
as an equal.
CONDUCT IN VILLAGES
24. Don't enter a village as if it entirely belonged to you. It
belongs to the natives. But enter it with some show of
confidence, as if you expected a friendly welcome. In any settled
district you are likely to get it, because that is the natives' habit.
25. Needless to say, you have
to deserve it by good
behaviour. If you behave badly
the natives will probably clear
out and leave you on your
uppers. And ■when you come
to the next village, and the
next, you may find them empty.
Bad behaviour on the part of
one or two men can ruin the
prospects of your whole party.
26. Do not butt in on village
affairs. If a feast or cere-
mony is going forward you
may do well to show an
interest, hut only as a bystander.
Find Them Empty
Don't go so far as to hold things up by your questions. You
will then have become a nuisance. If you think the native
carryings-on are laughable, don't laugh.


27. If you see queer things
stuck up on village houses,
on the verandahs, or in the
village square, leave them
alone. They may be sacred
or magical signs. Don't beat
a drum without first asking if
you may. As often as not the
village drums are under tabu.
If you see a twist of leaves
tied round the butt of a coco-
nut palm or a fruiting tree, it
is a tabu mark. It is meant
to stay there. Try another
tree.
Try Another
Tree
PAYMENT
28. In districts under our control the natives have been instructed
to help and have been promised rewards for doing so. They
can give you food, shelter and information, and they can guide
you on your way. Express your thanks. Pay if you can.
29. Pay is important. The native economic system is one of
reciprocity, which just means, "tit for tat." Give him something
for services rendered, even if it is only half a stick of tobacco,
a fish-hook or a razor-blade.
30. Do not overpay. For one thing the uneducated native has
no idea of money values and may make ridiculous demands.
For another thing, shrewd eggs will be out for what they can
get. (They have been heard to demand 2/- for a single coconut
and a case of meat for a bunch of bananas). Learn the current
prices and do not exceed them.
31. Here is a rough scale of pre-war prices. They refer to
villages. In towns (or encampments), you may have to pay
twice as much. It is only a general guide, not a fixed scale:
prices vary according as the food in question is plentiful or not.
Values may be changing in wartime; if in doubt consult ANGAU.


(Prices are given in tobacco, 3 sticks = 1/- to the native).
Coconuts .... .... 5-10 (according to district) .. For 1 stick
Bananas Small bunch „ 1 ~
Bananas Big Bunch Up to 3 sticks
Pineapples .... .. 1-3 (according to size) .... For 1 stick
Oranges 12 „ 1
Pawpaws .... .. 3 or 4 (say 12 lbs.) „ 1
'Taro . . Small basketful (say 12 lbs.) „ 1
Sweet Potatoes .... Small basketful (say 12 lbs.) „ 1 ~
Tams . .... .... Small basketful (say 12 lbs.) ~ 1 ~
Sago.... .... .... Bundle of about 25 lbs „ ,,
(Rate, |d. per lb.)
32. Good trade lines, easy for the individual to carry, are beads,
matches, razor-blades, handkerchiefs, fish-hooks, fish-lines,
red and black "paint" powder. Even a needle with a yard
or so of thread is acceptable.
Larger lines are hatchets, knives, pocket knives, files, mirrors,
calico, belts, pouches, mouth organs, etc.
Coarse salt goes well in the mountains. A dessertspoonful
is worth a stick of tobacco.
33. Conserve your tobacco supply. If you want to give the
native a tip, don't think you have to give him a whole
stick; give him half an inch. Keep your old newspapers for
the natives' cigarettes.
34 If you have nothing, give him at least a chit, or "paper,"
for receipt, See that you write decently, giving your name,
his name, the date and the circumstances. He will be able to
cash in on it later on.
35. Never allow begging. Native children soon get the habit
if encouraged. Don't make unnecessary presents of tins of
meat to anyone. Remember the tit for tat principle. Anyway,
there is not so much food in New Guinea that you can afford
to give it way for nothing.


THREE GOLDEN RULES
36. Remember three things in any village—gardens, pigs and
women. They are of basic importance in the lives of New
Guinea Natives, and interference with any of them will bring
trouble to you and your mates. Don't forget this. Stick it in
your hat.
GARDENS:—
37. Natives depend on their own small gardens in which they
grow enough to support themselves only, with some surplus
for an occasional feast. A large body of troops would eat them
out in no time. You cannot expect them to go hungry on your
account.
38. If there are no natives about and you have to help your-
selves to food in a garden, leave some payment. Tie some
tobacco to a stick and stick it in the ground near where you
pulled the taro or cut the sugar-cane. Leave your "mark" also
on a piece of paper —your name, and a picture of the Union Jack
or the Stars and Stripes. Tie it round the gift. The native does
this sort of thing himself and he will understand.
VILLAGE PIGS:—
39. Be most careful about village pigs. They are not always
on sale like meat in a butcher's stall. The native values
them very highly, fattening them for some special occasion. He
may not wish to sell at all, and anyway the price is high. (In
remoter parts you might get one for an axe, but the price may
be £5 on the coast.) If you see a pig within a mile of a village,
then ten to one it is a village pig, not a wild one. You will
probably find it has a slit in its ear. Don't shoot at sight.
Bargain first. Hardly anything can upset the natives more than
taking his pigs.
NATIVE WOMEN:—
40. There's only one thing to be more careful about than village
pigs, and that is village women.


41. Among some tribes the women associate readily with
Europeans; in others they will not associate at all. Even
where they do there are two parties to consider; (1) the women
themselves, (2) their menfolk.
42. If the woman is not consenting, then intercourse is just
rape—whether the victim be white or brown. Under the
laws of Mew Guinea it is a hanging matter.
43. If the men (husbands, fathers or brothers) are not consenting,
then it is at least a very serious kind of interference. If they
do not seek their revenge, they will at least clear out, taking
their women with them, and you will lose their co-operation.
44. In any case, an affair with a native
woman is not a love-match; it is a deal.
You are expected to pay.
45. The personal risks are granuloma, gon-
norrhoea, and (where the Japanese have
got there first) syphilis.
NATIVE OFFICIALS
46. On entering a village make a bee-line for
the native officials, if there are any. They
are paid by the Administration and wear
uniforms or badges. They have some authority
over the villagers, and it is their duty to
help white men. (If they greet you with a
Expected to Pay
rcr.her unusual kind of salute, return it and keep a straight face).
47. The village officials are;—
Papua: Tillage Constable (V.C.). Always called the "Village
Policeman." Blue serge jumper and loin cloth and red sash.
Village Councillor: "Medal" only.
Mandated Territory of New Guinea: Paramount Luluai (for
large districts, 30-50 villages). Cap, broad red band, white cap


cover, staff. Luluai —cap, broad red band. Tultul —cap, two
narrow red bands. Medical Tultul —cap, white band, red cross.
The uniform may be much tattered, like your own. But the
native has a high respect for it; make it appear that you do also.
48. Appeal in the first place to the Village Policeman or the
Luluai (or Paramount Luluai if you happen to meet him).
If he is not in the village when you arrive, ask for him; he will
probably come at the double. He has to keep up a position in
front of the villages, so don't let him down by disrespectful
treatment. Kid to him a little. He will arrange for food, if there
is any to be had; also for shelter and carriers.
IMPORTANT VILLAGERS
49. Only one village in half-a-dozen will have a Village Police-
man or a Luluai. But every village has a leader or head-
man, usually a middle-aged man. He is the village spokesman
and has some real authority. He may not be easy to distinguish,
for there are, generally speaking, no big chiefs in New Guinea
and no marks of chieftainship. But you should be able to pick
him. Having done so, treat him well, using a touch of ceremony.
50. New Guinea natives pay great respect to age. Therefore
go out of your way to address the old men. Give them a
smoke. They are still very important. The whole village will
appreciate this attention.
51. Some young men, "Smart Alecs," may press forward. They
are not likely to be of real importance in the village. But
do not snub them or brush them aside too readily. They are
progressives, and may be very useful.
MISSION BOYS
52. Do not be swayed by Idle talk against the Missions. Their
presence in New Guinea has made your way much easier.
You can thank them, incidentally, for the fact that many natives


can understand your English. Never jeer at a Mission boy
simply because he is a Mission boy.
53. Mission teachers are likely to be specially useful. They
have more influence over the natives than does the Village
Constable or Luluai. They will also understand your needs
better. They have a fine tradition of hospitality towards white
men.
54. In the (former) Mandated Territory some Mission teachers
of German nationality were suspected of Axis sympathies,
but it is believed that a soldier could depend upon their help
in time of trouble, without fear of betrayal to the Japanese.
COMMUNICATING IDEAS
55. There may be a great deal of jabbering and shouting in the
village when you first arrive. Keep cool and be patient; it
will simmer down. Don't join in, but find a man who can talk
some English, take him aside and tell him clearly, quietly and
slowly what you want.
56. Use the simplest words you can. If he cannot understand,
remember that raising your voice won't help. And don't get
angry. It's not his responsibility to know your language.
57. Make every effort, now, to learn Police-Motu for use in Papua;
Pidgin-English for use in the Mandated Territory. If it
doesn't get you an extra stripe, it may one day get you a feed.
On the side you will get some fun out of learning these comic
languages.
58. Remember that the language difficulty lies at the root of
misunderstanding and friction. Don’t think a native stupid
because he can't understand your foreign tongue; if anyone is


stupid it is you for not knowing his. Don't think him silly, or
mischievous, or a liar because he says he understands what you
want and then does something entirely different. The fact is
probably that you did not get your meaning across.
59. The native is anxious to please. He, too, often gives you
the answer he thinks you want rather than the true answer.
Therefore be careful not to suggest an answer when you put a
question. If you show annoyance when he says "Yes" and
then, to make sure, put the question again, he will as like as
not say " No."
60. He is rather a ready liar in any case,
for he has not been brought up like
George Washington to think that lying is
a very serious matter. Don't swallow the
first man's story whole. Try out some
other informants (independently, not in a
group; a group of natives usually speaks
as one man).
61. Even when he thinks he is telling
the truth the native is a great exag-
gerator—whether about the number of
dead or the size of mountains. Take it
with a grain of salt. Be critical.
62. One small point is worth noting. Don't
put questions in the "negative" form.
Let us suppose there are no Japanese in
Not Like
George Washington
the native's village. You say to him, "Are there any Japanese
in your village?" He answers, truthfully, " No." If you say to
him, "There are no Japanese in your village, are there?" He
will answer, " Yes." He is still speaking the truth. He means,
"Yes, there are not." In short the word for "Yes" in nearly all
languages but our own means simply, "I agree with you."
Remember this point if you don't want to be misled.


63. You can always fall back on sign-
language, One or two points are as
follows: —
The commonest way of counting is by
doubling the fingers into the palm of the
hand, starting with the little finger. Clench
your fist for 5; clench both fists and hold
them together for 10.
To extend the left arm and flick the
fingers near the right ear means shooting
an arrow or firing a rifle. It will be used
as a sign to indicate the presence of the
enemy.
To place the palm of the hand on the
cheek and bend the head sideways indi-
cates a "sleep" or a day's stage on a
journey.
Sign Language
Beckon with the palm of your hand down, not up.
Don't point. Natives don't seem to get it. If you want to
indicate something near at hand the best way is to go and
touch it.
You can easily invent signs to show that you want food
or drink.
HOSTILE NATIVES
64. "Generally speaking," to quote an experienced New Guinea
prospector, "natives civilised and uncivilised are friendly and
therefore should be treated as friends, not as black bastards who
Intend to murder you at the slightest chance." There are hardly
any "wild" natives left in New Guinea; certainly none in the
well-known parts where troops are operating.
65. Reasons for possible hostility are—(l) Fear of the complete
stranger; (2) co-operation with the enemy; (3) vengeance for
ill-treatment. '
But (I) you, being a white man, are not a complete stranger.
Natives have been used to the likes of you for 50 years.
(2) Generally speaking, the natives prefer to co-operate with us,


not with the enemy. (3) If you and your mates always give the
natives a good spin they will have nothing to avenge.
66. If therefore you ever find yourself lost in the bush, don't
be afraid of the native population. Make it your first object
to find some of them. They represent your best, perhaps your
only, chance of survival.
67. The only time or place in which you need fear making
contact with the natives is when you are near the enemy.
They may be working with him and they may have been promised
rewards for capturing you. The obvious thing then is to sneak
off. When you think you are at a safe distance, find some
natives and take your chance. It should be a good one.
68. If you see a spear stuck in the middle of the path and
pointing towards you, or if you see some twisted grass on
a strip of bark stretched across the track, it is a sign that the
natives do not want you to proceed. It may mean they are
hostile.
69. Bide your time. Shout. If they are anywhere near they
will soon come and have you under observation. And if
you are alone they are not likely to hurt you, because they will
not be much afraid of one man. If there are a number of you,
they won't hurt you either, because then they will be afraid.
70. If you have a friendly native with you as a guide, get him
to do the shouting. That is the native fashion. He will
announce your harmlessness and your good intentions. (If you
think the enemy are near, it is of course a different matter. It
may be the wrong thing to shout then, but that is because of
the enemy, and we are talking about natives.)
71. If no one comes in answer to your shouting, it probably
means there is no one within earshot. Proceed, keeping your
eyes open. You've got to take your chance anyway. The
alternative is possibly to starve.
72. When you reach the village enter it confidently as you do
a gate with "Beware of the Dog" on it. Don't show fear,


and don't start brandishing your walking stick, or the dog may
try to bite you. It will certainly snarl if only under its breath.
73. Natives will soon dribble in if they are not there already.
They will be curious and probably rather frightened (i.e., if
they are at all "wild") and only too anxious to make up to you.
Have a smoke; give them a smoke; ask for some food; pay for
it if you can.
74. If the women remain in a village on your entry, all is well;
the native "trusts" you. If they clear at the first sign of
your approach, it means that he is suspicious. It is wise then
to be on your guard. But when the women start to trickle back,
you have the "all clear" signal for certain.
75. When in a strange village keep a good lookout on your
stores and property. Natives are skilful thieves. If you
are sure something has been stolen you've got to make a row
about it. Get it back or exact some fair penalty.
76. If the natives actually oppose you, throwing spears and
shooting arrows, fire a shot over their heads. This has been
the Government method in New Guinea for 60 years. It nearly
always acts. Only in the last extremity might a Government
officer shoot to kill, and then he had to explain his way through
a court of inquiry. You are now getting the benefit of 60 years
of humane and sensible pacification. Try to keep up the standard.
77. Bear in mind that native bowmen can't shoot straight at any
decent range and a man can't throw a spear any distance.
Dodging bullets is unfortunately not possible; but dodging spears
and arrows is a recognised part of native warfare.
78. If you have natives (police or others) under your control,
keep a strict hand over them when in strange country. If
they thieve or play up with women, the natives will naturally
turn hostile or clear out. It is your responsibility.
79. If you have had a clash with hostile natives and have had
maybe to kill one or two of them, don't follow it up with a;
general revenge. Don't go in for "shooting up," and don't set


fire to houses. The natives will have had enough, and it will
pay you best to make friends again as soon as you can.
80. But the main thing, to repeat, is that the natives are very
unlikely to attack you. Dont expect it.
LABOUR
81. You may some day find yourself in charge of a gang of
labourers or a line of carriers. If you have some power
of command and a good temper, and if you have remembered
that air of superiority, you will get good work out of them. If
not, hand over to someone else.
82. Be both considerate and firm. In the words of a miner,
"You must be boss, father and mother to them all."
83. Pay full attention to their food, shelter, clothing, health,
tobacco and pay.
84. Natives are not always good at keeping their own promises.
But old-timers agree that if you make a promise to a native
you must keep it. So make none that you don't intend to keep
or can't keep.
85. You must be judge in their disputes. None are too trivial
for your notice. Do your best to get to the bottom of them.
Have no favourites and don't get anyone set.
86. Leave slave-driving to the Japanese. Your men should have
reasonable hours and a right to their leisure. Alternatively
you may give them reasonable daily "tasks" which they can
finish in their own time.
87. The native does not expect the white man to do manual
labour. He is ready to do the hard work or the dirty work
himself under the white man's supervision. But remember what
you expect from your own officers and N.C.O.'s. —that one who
gives an order should be ready, if need be, to carry it out
himself. Do not demand the impossible, whether in working
hours or weight of loads.


88. At the same time they like the white
boss who is a worker and a cheerful
one. And they will respond to example.
If you can sing, sing. They will be tickled
to death.
89. All orders should be given in an even
manner and as though you expect
they will be obeyed. Let no shade of
doubt enter into your voice.
90. Don't stand any nonsense. You are
bound to find some loafers, pointers
and malingerers. Watch them and keep
them up to it. Be firm from the start.
Don't let them put it over you. For
malingerers, try the thermometer.
If You Can Sing
91. There may be a bad egg who
deliberately defies you, just to try you out. There is only one
thing to do in those circumstances. Crack him.
92. But always try to keep your temper. If there is anything
the native hates it is a bad tempered boss. Don't abuse
him and don't nag. If you find yourself specially irritated by
the way your labourers are behaving, take some more quinine
and a dose of salts.
93. Try not to mess them about. Get a clear idea of what you
want and tell or show them clearly what it is. Be as
patient as you can when they get hold of the wrong end of
the stick. It's mostly your fault anyway.
94. The native knows very little about your way of life. If you
are very lucky enough to get a personal servant or a cook
remember that you have to teach him his business. Try to be
amused rather than angry if he mixes the sardines with the jam.
95. Don't lay about you. Punching natives grows into a habit
with some people. They even boast of their victories. But
it is a bad habit; for one thing the victories are too easy; and


for another the practice pays badly in the long run. Old-timers
will tell you that, and they know.
96. The native puts up with a lot. But if a man treats his
labourers too badly they will desert, and when they have
fled into the New Guinea bush he will not get them back in
a hurry.
97. In the natives' code of morals revenge is a good deed. The
man who habitually ill-treats his labourers is. the sort of
man they would betray to the Japanese if they got a chance.
And who shall say that he would not deserve it?
98. But New Guinea revenge is not always fixed on the guilty
individual. It commonly falls on one of his kinsmen or fellow
tribesman. So, if one of your cobbers ill-treats a labourer, you
may be the man to die for it.
TO SUM UP
99. The natives have a big opinion of Europeans in general,
but they will test you and size you up as an individual.
Your conduct can raise or lower the general standard. You are
therefore a guardian of the white man's prestige. It is a very
important obligation.
100. Remember finally that the New Guinea natives are one of
the world's Backward Peoples, and that Australia under-
took to regard their welfare as a "sacred trust."' They are now
in an unfortunate position. This fight is not theirs, and they
might well be excused for wanting to keep out of it. But at the
same time we absolutely need their help in order to win. So
we may have to make them work for us whether they like it
or not. That is a hard thing. But it will come easier to them,
and the work will be better, if we try to deserve our prestige
and treat them fair.


