

bth Pt&r)
lh~o \ I o
\/o\
ftC ('xXi 'm .//■ P/d- tSJ,


YOUNG AUSTRALIA.
Australia continues to advance, and has occupied of late a greatly
increased share of English popular attention. Publications dealing;
with the commercial, geographical, and physical characteristics of this
large and important, though most distant British possession are abun-
dant. Books of travel of various merit have followed in yet greater
number, but few of them deal in any adequate or other than superficial
manner with the moral and social aspects of the colonial nation
growing up in the Southern Hemisphere, and occupying a territory
nearly as large as the whole of Europe : or, if the tourist-writers
notice some divergences from familiar types, they do not seek out
or indicate the causes of the new development which they observe.
It is impossible for even the most highly gifted traveller to under-
stand Australia in a brief visit; he sees but
“ The outside life—the doublet of the flesh ; ”
and it is only by a lengthened residence that a clear conception is
obtained of the causes and influences which are moulding the young
Australian race into something quite different from the original
British-born settlers.
A visitor to the Australian Colonies suddenly alighting in the
busy part of one of the principal streets of such capitals as either
Sydney or Melbourne, will probably first of all be struck by the
outward similarity of much that he sees around him to the life ho
has left behind. Indeed, so great is the superficial resemblance
that he may feel tempted to ask himself whether he is not paying
a visit to some provincial city at home which chance has hitherto
prevented him from seeing before ? He will realize that it is
“ Not the feeling, but the sky
We change, however far we fly.”
But as first impressions wear off, he will be aware of many minor-
differences in detail, and of considerable divergence from the tone of
thought and feeling to which he has been accustomed. He will learn
that the colonial standpoint differs widely from his own, and that if
he himself has those defects which are attributed to insular com-
munities, he is among a people yet more insular in their ideas, and


strikingly peculiar in their conception of the relative position that
they hold in this great world of ours.
Though it is only by continued observation that their ultimate
effect can be justly estimated, the causes of this growing divergence
are soon found. The great distance of the Australian continent
from the centres of European civilization, the impossibility, except
in the case of the most opulent classes, of much international inter-
course, the cessation of any considerable stream of emigration for a
number of years, and most of all, the growth to manhood of the
colonial-born —now much the larger half of the population—under
the narrow and restricted form of compulsory education provided by
the State for the people, admirable as it is in many aspects, are the
chief factors in this very perceptible change.
The increased facilities for intercourse afforded by the numerous
lines of mail steamers now running to the colonies do not affect the
masses; not five per cent, of the Australian population will ever, or
can ever, leave those distant shores to visit the old homes from which
their fathers sprang, or will see beyond the contracted horizon—for
it is contracted, the great continental area notwithstanding—that
surrounds them. That the “old home” is their father’s home, and
not their own, explains the whole matter, and furnishes the clue to the
evident fact, that notwithstanding the increased means of communica-
tion with the mother-country, the insulation is becoming more
marked. Until recent years the majority of the population had
memories, which most of them sedulously cherished, of the land of
their birth ; they had grown up amidst English associations ; their
eyes had looked on English scenes and grown familiar with English
ways—things seen and heard that ramified through every incident of
their youthful life; and their mental vision had not been altogether
limited and bounded by the inevitably smaller interests of young
isolated communities.
Immigration on any considerable scale is no longer a prominent
feature in colonial life, and indeed in Victoria has practically ceased
for many years. The result is, the British-born element has been
gradually dying out, and in the colony of Victoria the census of
1881 revealed the fact that the number had fallen as low as 38 per
cent, of the whole population. From the advancing age of the early
colonists, this decrease is continuing at a greatly increased rate.
At the present moment at least two-thirds of the population are
colonial-born, and in a few years, unless immigration again sets in,
the whole population will practically be of colonial birth—a popula-
tion to which, for the most part, the mother-country will be but a
noble and historic name. In New South Wales, Victoria, and
Western Australia, the State schools, corresponding to the Board
schools in England, are the schools of the bulk of the population, and
are so to a far greater extent than in England, where so many lower


middle-class schools abound. So far from English history, as the
common heritage of our race, being cherished in the schools of
Victoria and New South Wales—the colonies containing more than
two-thirds of the population of Australia—it is absolutely tabooed !
For aught the young Australian knows of the great past which
made our race what it is to-day—of the glorious memory of those
whose spirits rule us from their urns, of the heroic deeds of those
who shed their blood on many a well-fought field to build up
England’s greatness, of the self-sacrificing conflicts of Englishmen
for civil and religious freedom, and of the slow changes by which
our Constitution, of which theirs is a copy, was perfected, culmi-
nating in the stability of a throne
“ Broad-based upon the people’s will ”
he might as well be a Peruvian or a citizen of the Republic of Uruguay!
The battle was fought out years ago in colonial party conflicts, and,
in their wisdom, the rulers of that day decided that English his-
tory could not be taught without perpetuating party feeling and
religious feuds in the mixed Australian community, which contains
a large number of Irish Roman Catholics, and so history was banished
altogether, as well as religious teaching of any kind. It is improbable
that the authors of this measure foresaw that such a policy must in-
evitably lead to a decay of national feeling, or that they deliberately
legislated for such a result; but some at least of them might have re-
membered that the surest way of stamping out racial pride and patriotic
instincts is to adopt the policy pursued by countries like Russia, which
forbids the teaching of the language or history of its conquered States.
A more deplorable decision could not have been arrived at. Dr, Moor-
house, the present Bishop of Manchester, when battling for some
revision of the curriculum pursued in Victoria, contended that some
compromise might surely be effected by which an outline of English
history, founded not only on the usual authorities, but having re-
gard to Lingard’s History also—such a compilation, in short, as could
scarcely offend the susceptibilities of any section, could be taught.
Only a year ago, on some action in the matter being proposed, a
protest was immediately made against teaching this “ perilous ”
subject. It was urged that a third of the teachers are Catholic, and
it was asked how could they narrate and explain historical events
such as the mutual struggles, persecutions, and retaliations of
Protestants and Catholics ? This is the invariable answer to the
qustion why history is boycotted in Australia. It would perhaps be
difficult to the Catholic teacher to explain the story of the massacre
of St. Bartholomew, or certain episodes of Queen Mary’s reign, but
the bare facts and dates might be given, and Australian boys and girls
might be grounded in the leading events of history without suppress-
ing history books altogether, as a dangerous magazine filled with


explosive facts. It should at the same time be remembered that
Australian communities are very much more mixed than at home.
No one can walk along any of the principal streets in Sydney or
Melbourne without being struck by the frequency of Scotch and Irish
names over the shop-fronts, and the infrequency of English names.
The exclusion of this important subject from the schools of jive-
sixths of the people, taken together with the universal existence of
manhood suffrage, will have a marked effect upon the tone of
colonial life and politics in the next decade. The colonial youth are
growing very sensible of the change in the balance of power that
the majority of the colonial-born occasions. Since the census
returns of 1881 showed that the corner was turned, societies are
everywhere forming, whose watchword is “ Australia for the Austra-
lians ”; and these societies constitute a formidable body to be
reckoned with at the hustings. Whether in professions, trade, or
politics, there is a decided disposition to discourage the new comer,
and to depreciate what is called “ the imported article.” It is not
confined to the working-man’s hostility to emigration, for not a
university professor or grammar-school head-master is now “ im-
ported ” without calling forth angry tirades in the protectionist news-
papers, which serve to show, if nothing more, the set of the tide of
colonial feeling. And, as the older colonists rapidly diminish in num-
ber the restraint becomes daily weaker; manhood suffrage is bestow-
ing upon the fast matmung first crop of colonial-born youth an over-
whelming preponderance, which will very shortly swamp all other
interests, and send typical representatives in increasing numbers
into Parliament, with the stipend—in Victoria—of P3OO a-year and a
free railway pass. It is an universally accepted axiom that no man
can understand the present without a knowledge of the past, and it
is not consolatory to the small cultured class in Australia to remember
that all this nearly enfranchized majority has passed through the
State schools of the last fifteen years, learning nothing*©! past history,
from which alone lessons for the future can be drawn-—lessons from
the failures and successes of past struggles, or of the great movements
by means of which all that is admirable in the British Constitution
has been built up. Such knowledge is not intuitive, nor can they
expect in Australia, more than anywhere else, to reap where they
have not sown; and judging from some few of the uninstructed
already in the colonial Assemblies, the prospect is not encouraging I
They possess no standard of comparison and no sense of proportion.
There is a conspicuous absence of power to take broad views of
questions of State policy, or to view things in their larger relations;
and thus the colonial M.P. but too often corresponds to the exalted
vestryman at home. No one can read the reports of the debates in
colonial Parliaments without being greatly impressed by the ex-
aggerated notions of the importance and position occupied by each,


and by the undue prominence given to every crude remark on the
most insignificant subject—utterances only made that they might be
read by the speakers’ constituents in some up-country township
being verbally reported—as well as by the language and the person-
alities which too often disfigure the proceedings of these assemblies.
The extraordinary discrepancy between the recorded impressions
of different classes of visitors to the colonies is sometimes amusingly
illustrated. Not long since a German baron, with true German
thoroughness, provided himself with a saddle-horse, and in this
fashion travelled throughout the length and breadth of the four
colonies of New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, and
Queensland, visiting nearly every township, making himself ac-
quainted with every phase of colonial life, and seeking thereby to
arrive at a just estimate of the characteristics of the Anglo-
Australian race. His travels have been lately published in three
volumes. His verdict is diametrically opposed to that which has
become fashionable of late. Instead of seeing the country through
the roseate spectacles usually provided for distinguished visitors—
who are only allowed to see the gilded side of things, and for whom
matters are made so pleasant that they live the whole time more
or less “ up in a balloon,” so that after a course of this hospitable
treatment they almost invariably take away an entirely false im-
pression—the Count incurred* no danger of acquiring a one-sided
view, and the result, it need scarcely be said, was not that of the
“ personally conducted.” The two classes of visitors well illustrate
“ the falsehood of extremes,” the truth lying mid-way between their
fallacious estimates.
The Count, however, justly dwells on the enervating influence of
life in the large cities, where such a disproportionate number of the
whole population of Australia are congregated, owing to the protected
industries, and on the absurd infatuation for out-door sports and
pastimes which prevails, engrossing the minds of the population to
an extent almost beyond the Teuton comprehension.
If we turn to the consideration of the material advancement of
the country, the Government statistics and the Australian banking
records place beyond doubt the fact that the accumulated wealth of
so relatively small a community is greater than can be found else-
where. The great number of banking establishments and companies,
paying large dividends to the shareholders and adding large sums
annually to their reserve funds, testifies to the widespread prosperity
and the great natural advantages and almost boundless resources
possessed by the Australian colonies. The evidence is so over-
whelming that no visitor can fail to be impressed by the outward
and visible signs which appear around him on all hands. The
acquisition of wealth is so absorbing, and so possible to so large
a number, that it is becoming a source of danger to the best


interests of those who pursue it with such extreme avidity, and
threatens to strangle their higher nature. Material prosperity has
become a fetich in the colonies. In other lands there are many
other subjects of interest, other professions, other careers—the army,
navy, art, science, literature, and various other worthy objects of
ambition —to divide people’s attention besides money-making pure
and simple. The acquisition of wealth by a large proportion of
the community has been too sudden to admit of the growth of any
real distinction between those who possess it and those who do
not; hence much of the engrossing passion to acquire likewise
that which alone has separated those who started in life only a
short time previously on an equal footing. What with the dis-
coveries of gold and the wholesale grabbing of the public lands in
the not very distant past, or the sale of the same, at ridiculously low
prices, to the political friends of those in power, there has been a
general shaking up of the social bag, and the people who came out
uppermost were mostly those who had been lowest before. This
change was brought about too suddenly to allow of people properly
settling down into their respective positions. Where men who only
a few years previously occupied a like social position, become divided
into higher and lower classes according to the amount of money
which they may have acquired, a sense of equal merit, or the want
of it, increases the ardour of the pursuit of that which may
again, at any moment, place them in the same social rank. And
the absence of any other ideal than , wealth is thus a conspicuous
feature in the colonies. One of the keenest wants felt in Australia
is an atmosphere of sympathy in intellectual aims. There is neither
the pursuit of culture as an object of intrinsic worth, nor the remotest
conception that it may be carried to that self-sufficing point where
men see physical demands to be merely secondary, and where, being
sustained by the conviction that life is more than meat, they can
willingly abandon the lower pursuit of material comforts if they can
thereby obtain nobler living. Such a counterpoise of mere wealth can
scarcely be said to have begun to exist, even, as yet. And the State
education provided for the masses, from whom, owing to the constitu-
tion of things, the plutocracy is disproportionately recruited, is not
conducive to any higher ideal in the future. Politics offer the
speediest road to distinction—such as it is—and for that a very
slender equipment suffices. Literature is a finer product than
state-craft, and implies the possession of higher qualities and a
far more elaborate training. The professional politician seeking the
loaves and fishes of office is common enough there. Mr. Eobert
Browning in his last volume has, in his imaginary parley with a by-
gone type of this class, indited a scathing satire upon those who
pursue politics merely for the sake of their own personal profit and
.aggrandizement—a race which, latterly, has sprung up like mushrooms \


and the modern professional politician of this kind has nowhere grown
more rapidly than in the hotbed of Australian political life. The
exclusion of English history from the schools for the education of
the classes from which, by virtue of manhood suffrage, the future
legislators will be mainly drawn, deprives them of the contemplation
of either noble example or salutary warning. “ Political adventurers,”
writes an old colonist, <£ have been the curse of these communities.
To enter upon a political career with such objects as many appear to
set before them as their goal, is only second in baseness to that
of entering into holy orders without ever feeling any call or
intuition of possible fitness for such a sacred office. One deplorable
circumstance is, that success in this career leads to what Professor
Huxley has so concisely defined as “ the cheapening of the honour
of knighthood.” When one sees so often in the colonies a career
of that kind leading to honours which place men in the same rank
with those who have served their country in every clime —the sur-
vivors of others equally brave, who have fallen in the deadly breach
or on the battle-field, and far oftener with those who have devoted a
life to science and other kindred pursuits fraught with priceless
results to the race, one may reflect upon the strange complexity of
things. It seems that to serve the State a little and oneself much
more leads to the same goal as do the more noble paths we have
indicated.
The simplicity of life which prevailed in the early days of the
colonies has passed away. Some of the more thoughtful of the older
colonists look back with regret upon those times, and one of them
has given expression to this feeling in a charming little work known
only in Australia :
« The necessaries of life were produced in abundance, the comforts were
slowly reached, and the luxuries had to be done without. There was little
difference in the actual circumstances of different classes. Nobody em-
ployed hired labour who could possibly do the work himself. Perhaps
never in any human society did circumstances realize the ideas of the
community of labour and the equality of the sexes so fully as in South
Australia Youth and love, hope and trust, were the only stock
in marriage of young couples Social position depended on cha-
racter, and not on income.”
In Australia, as it is to-day, the absence of all parental authority
is a conspicuous feature, and the growth of the “larrikin” element
composed of roughs of the worst description—is another, which is
to a certain extent the outcome of the first.
It cannot, however, be fairly said that drunkenness is in any con-
siderable degree a vice which distinguishes the younger generation of
colonials. Tea may fairly claim to be the national beverage. A large
proportion of the population drink it with every meal, and you find
this a common custom even among the metropolitan middle classes.
Nor can the working classes as a body be charged with improvidence.


The amount of deposits in the savings hanks, as well as in the numerous
building societies, is very large in proportion to the population;
while the life assurance companies have attained to unexampled pro-
portions. The working men dress much more expensively than at
home, and notwithstanding the greatly enhanced cost of every article
of attire, no threadbare clothes are to be seen. They all have a
well-to-do look, free from care or anxiety. You can see that the bread-
and-butter question never enters into the thoughts of these people;
it is only the cake which is sometimes endangered. Almost every
working man has his girls taught to play on the piano. The im-
portation of pianos, both from England and Germany, is so great
that the heavy duty levied upon them forms no inconsiderable item
of revenue. There is scarcely a house, small or large, without a
piano, and every tavern has one, and at least one barmaid who can
perform upon it. Advertisements generally mention that accom-
plishment as an essential qualification. On a summer’s evening,
when both doors and windows are thrown open, you can scarcely
walk through even the smaller streets without having abundant
evidence from both sides of the possession of one of these instru-
ments. But cooking is an unknown art; yet the consumption of
meat is almost incredible—three times a day, in the hottest weather,
with little vegetables, is the rule. The supply of vegetables is mainly
left to the Chinaman, who brings them from door to door. It is
far too humble a pursuit for the average Australian. What are
the tendencies developed by such a gross diet is a question of ethics
into which they do not enter.
One very noticeable trait is the alacrity with which any appeal for
aid in cases of distress or public calamity is responded to. And this
is by no means a trait confined to the wealthier classes. Of course
there are a few among them who have occasionally made very hand-
some contributions for public purposes, and one or two especially,
whose magnificent donations very far exceed all the others put
together, have given on a scale worthy of any country in the old
world ; but, as a rule, the wealthier class has not distinguished itself
in this direction.
By those best qualified to know, a steady stream of immigration
of the right sort is considered to be one of the great needs of
Australia. Immigration raises the revenue ; it helps to pay the
interest of the debt. It reduces the expenditure proportionately to
the population. It gives more employment, since the new-comers must
be housed and clothed and must live; and it supplies more labour,
enabling fresh country and new industries to be opened up. Popu-
lation is the chief element of wealth and progress in a young country
like Australia. But the working classes wage war against immigration
of any kind. It has become a burning question, scarcely apprehended
at home. There is no doubt but that their relatively high wages


would fall in some degree; but, on the other hand, the purchasing
power of the money would be largely increased. The working-
men who come out from the old country become in a very few years
rabid protectionists, and extend that short-sighted policy even to the
human element, by doing their utmost to shut the door against those
who are seeking to escape the poverty from which they themselves
have been aided to escape. The loans floated in England, and
spent in public works, might have produced much greater results,
and thus, great as the progress of the colonies has been, their deve-
lopment has been retarded. There is scarcely a single article of con-
sumption that is not greatly enhanced in price by the high rate of
labour as well as the heavy duties, but they cannot be led to see that
probably a wage of two pounds weekly would then be equal to that of
three pounds under their present tariffs. An eight-hours day of labour
is scrupulously observed, and is now so universally established that
a, six-hours movement is openly spoken of. In the meanwhile, the
labour societies send delegates to Europe to discourage emigration
systematically. An unforeseen contingency has recently somewhat
disconcerted these tactics. Last year a line of German mail steamers
of the highest class, constructed so as to be readily converted into
armed cruisers, and heavily subsidised by the German Government,
commenced running to Australia. Of late each mail has brought seve-
ral hundred German workmen in addition to her ordinary passen-
gers, and these are dropped at the principal ports. The strategical
position of these societies at the present moment stands thus : while
exerting themselves to keep out their own countrymen, their flank
has been turned, and they have let in the foreigner! Vain are all
such attempts to interrupt permanently the order of things. The
records of the past show that the history of the human race is the
history of surplus populations in search of food. It has been so from
the earliest Aryan migration to the present time.
The arrival at maturity of the colonial-born race marks the entry
upon an entirely new era in the history of the colonies. The
present time has an interest which no future period of Australian
history can possess. Australia stands to-day at the point where
two roads meet. The past fifty years have given time for the
generation born in the colonies to grow up and become the pre-
ponderating element in the State, while the sturdy pioneers the
founders—have either passed or are passing rapidly away. The
fifty years to come will be trodden by the newer generation under
entirely different conditions. But there is felt to be something
wanting which the younger community can never possess. The
mighty influence of old associations and personal contact with the
old home of the race is a lost chord; and the boycotting of English
history, which above all things would have helped to counteract the
inevitable tendencies of such a void, is an error of the gravest


nature, the effect of which is only beginning, now the older genera-
tion is passing away, to be fully realized, and we have yet to await
its fullest development. It is indeed a startling discovery to a
visitor to an English colony to find, on questioning an intelligent
lad, that with regard to the simplest facts of English history his mind
is an entire blank. Some of the more highly cultivated of the
native-born are deploring the want of all reverence, the lack of old
associations, and the absence of any noble ideal, which are such
noticeable features in colonial life. One of these writes : “We elect
to stand apart from old associations, and thoughtlessly strive to lessen
that dignity which we refuse to share It is in reality a
jealous nationality growing up within us.”
The response to such reasoning which naturally suggests itself is,
why “ elect to stand apart ? ” Why break the continuity of our
national history ? Are not Australians also heirs to all that glorious
heritage “ far brought from out the storied past ? ”
“No distance breaks the tie of blood,
Brothers are brothers evermore.”
Who would willingly check the throb of pride or lessen the glow
of exultation at the thought of all that which links us with
England’s glory ? Which of us can afford to renounce our interest
in the accumulated capital of the historic past ?To be out of
sympathy with our national traditions, not to revere them, not to
preserve them, is to condemn ourselves to generations of inferiority.
To many men it would be equal to the loss of one sense ;to one
avenue of knowledge quite shut out. In ancient Greece, when a
colony went forth, the emigrants took coals from the sacred fire of
the public hearth of the town they left. Hestia’s fire must never
go out!
The same writer deplores—
“ The peculiar hardness in the native character, which cannot fail to strike
the student of human nature, combined at the same time with an almost
precocious intelligence. We know that the fairy tales and enchanted
castles which produced so deep an impression on home children would only
amuse those of Australia This fact, very conspicuous in children,
derives importance from its wide-spread influence over all classes of our
colonial society. Unlike the want of reverence, this national hardness does
really arise from want of old associations. We suffer unmistakably,
though our land is so geologically ancient, from a most uncomfortable
sense of newness. Oral legends and wonderful stories of bygone days
serve to refine the imagination of the poorer classes in the old countries,
and to cultivate their hearts; but the lower classes here have no such
resource. When we come to notice how the upper classes of society are
distinguished, those who after all ought to be the criterion of what our
national character is, what do we find? Allowing for an artificially
acquired refinement, which is absent in their poorer brethren, the wealthier
circles, as far as regards the native-born colonists, exhibit precisely the same
characteristic want of idealism, with its concomitant defect, excessive love
Yol. 128. —No. 5.


of external excitement and pleasure. The extreme zest which we display
for our great public amusements, for our horse-racing, our cricket, and our
athletic sports generally, is an evidence to a critical observer that as a
people we have little intellectual resource.”
Few who know Australia well will dissent from the conclusions of
the writer. High spirits, business capacity, courageous instincts, and
generous impulses, are characteristics of which a people maybe justly
proud; but, after all, the foundation of all true greatness is in the
moral powers. There has never been in those lands, as in older
countries, any great crisis of national history calling for the sacrifices
which, at one and the same time, exercise the conscience and vindicate
the supremacy of the moral nature. The race in which the moral
nature is strong will supply its own ideal at last, and when it
comes it will be of the best. There can be no valid reason why
Australians shall permanently lack the qualities which the writer
indicates. The short hours of labour, as contrasted with those which
prevail in Europe, will provide abundant opportunities for culture.
History teaches that in England great epochs of national prosperity
have also been great periods of culture. The wonderful growth of
wealth and social energy which marked the Elizabethan period was
accompanied by an equally remarkable intellectual advance. 11 The
general awakening of national life,” it is recorded, “of wealth, of
refinement and leisure, which marked that period, was accompanied
by a quickening of English intelligence which found vent in the
new impulse given to learning at our universities.”
There is no nobler literature than our own for the culture of
those of English stock; and from that, in other climes, there might
arise a new blossoming of the imagination—not the same, but like
in difference. But there must be appropriate soil for it to take root.
The history-primer in childhood lays a foundation which in riper years
bears its own proper fruit. Through that low archway is obtained
the child’s first glimpse into the kingdom of the past —another
region than that immediately around him—a gallery of great deeds.
Eor the awakening of the youthful imagination history is an indis-
pensable instrument of culture, as well as for the intelligible under-
standing of the life that now is ; even as it takes two languages to
teach us the resources of one. To put it on one side marks the
antithesis of the Greek culture of the people to whom the histories
of Herodotus were read at the public games. It is later on that the
results of this omission will become apparent. It is yesterday which
makes to-morrow! And there is learning which does not make
money, but makes men ! Such subjects cannot be spared in the
training of citizens, who, from the rapid development of a new
country, so often suddenly fall into the ranks of the wealthier and
more influential classes. There is a want of perspective, a want
of symmetrical development, in all education without them. Near


objects assume exaggerated proportions, and distant ones are unduly
diminished. The mental result is like the defective art of the
early Greek painters, who gave to each object its proper perspective,
but were unable to give to separate objects their relative perspective.
No culture can be anything but one-sided which does not recognize
those essential laws which are the same for the whole human race.
Nor will an unequal development facilitate the birth of a new
literature; and literature is acknowledged to be as essential a con-
stituent of social organization as law, physic, or divinity.
That able statesman, the late Ambassador of China to Europe,
the Marquis Tseng, has recently left us words of wisdom on a
subject with which, mutatis mutandis , we, too, are deeply concerned.
His seemingly paradoxical assertion regarding the teeming population
of his own country when he argues that China is not over-populated,
and that she is under no necessity to find outlets for her surplus
population beyond the limits of her own empire, might be made with
equal truth of ours. “ What China wants is distribution, not emi-
gration, for there are still vast tracts in Manchuria, Mongolia, and
Eastern Turkestan which have never felt the touch of the husband-
man.” Perish the word “ emigration ” in the sense in which it
has been hitherto applied! England, also, has room for all her
surplus population within the limits of her own empire. That the
colonies should be drawn together in closer ties, as parts of one great
organism, one history, one literature, one nation, is the dream of
“ All the loyal hearts who long
To keep our English empire whole ! ”
On every side of late years contemporary events have tended to
enforce lessons of this nature. Federated Italy, Germany, and
America all illustrate the same theme. Were but a “ hands-all-
round ” policy inaugurated in this year of years, the nation which
above all others has
“ Sailed wherever ship could sail,
And founded many a mighty State,”
would present a spectacle such as the world has never yet seen.
