

YOUNAH!
A TASMANIAN ABORIGINAL
ROMANCE OF THE CATARACT GORGE,
THE BASIN, SOUTH ESK.
BY
MRS. W. I. THROWER.
Hobart:
FEINTED AT “THE MERCURY” OFFICE, MACQUARIE STREET.
1894.


YOUNAH.
A TASMANIAN ABORIGINAL
ROMANCE OF THE CATARACT GORGE.
BY
MRS. W. I. THROWER.


YOUNAH,
A Romance of the Cataract gorge.
By Mrs. W. I. THROWER,
CHAPTER I.
“ And here, from month to month, the time
Is kissed by peace and pleasure.
While Mature sings her Woodland rhyme
And hoards her Woodland treasure.”
KENDAL.
»HE long shadows which pre-
cede the sunset were
already lying across the
placid waters of “Theßasin,”
as it lay embosomed amid
encircling hills upon an
afternoon in the early
Tasmanian spring, at a
period in Tasmania’s
history, when as yet the rugged cliffs,
the rushing waters, and the dark,
secluded gorge of the “ The Cataract ”
were unknown to pale-faced Northern
intruders.
Worthy of the brush of an artist was
the scenepresentedupon that afternoon,
as _ the dusky forms of Tasmania’s own
children were seen flitting about the
margin of the stream, upon the banks of
which a tribe had but just encamped
for their summer quarters, and the
gunyahs—as their primitive tents of
Bark and boughs were termed—had not
long been erected.
- The encampment —if such a term be
permissible—consisted of about twenty
of these small structures, each one
being placed as closely as possible to a
large tree.
An acute observer might—had there
been one there —have remarked two or
three circumstances,which,even to him,
unversed in the manners of these
children of the forest, would have
seemed not of common occurrence,
the first being the fact that a re-
Saxlingham, Launceston.
markable air of expectancy pervaded
the members of the little camp, who
seemed to be preparing for some
festivity j the second was the absence
of all males,with the exception of a few
very old men with grizzled locks and
bent forms, and some youths still far
removed from man’s estate.
The men, too,seemed strangely indolent,
for they took no active part in whatever
preparations were going on, leaving all
the labour to the other sex, who had,
indeed, erected all the gunyahs, and
carried to the spot the materials of
which they were made.
But now, at last, all being
the women, old and young, were at
liberty to roam about and enjoy, as
keenly as only they could, the strange,
wild beauty of the spot to which their
tribe had often resorted at that season,
and to which they had but just returned
after an absence of many months.
Makooi, an elderly lubra, under whose
direction the other women seemed to
move,led the way towards a grassy knoll,
which commanded a view of the banks
upon the opposite side of the river, and,
standing there, she raised her hand to
her brows and looked eagerly across the
water as if expecting someone. But
nothing broke the stillness of the wood
beyond, save an occasional rustle made
by some wary animal, which had become
conscious that his retreat might at any
moment be discovered by the cunning
hunters already so near him.
Makooi, like the other women of her
tribe, was clad scantily enough, for her
only garment was a single skin of the
kangaroo, and this hung from her
shoulders. A girdle made of thin strips
of the dried skin of some animal


encircled her ample waist, a fillet of the
like materialbindingherthick black hair
far back from her forehead, the_ locks in
the immediate vicinity of which were
closely shaven.
Following closely in the wake of
Makooi were several young maidens of
the tribe, each of whom looked expect-
antly in the same direction towards
which their leader’s glances were bent,
as though expecting someone to emerge
from the midst of the thick belt of
shrubs and undergrowth which reached
to the brink of the stream, and was
clearly reflected upon its mirror-like
surface. Something else was reflected
therein, to the evident satisfaction of
the group of young girls who lingered
behind Makooi, as they bent over the
stream to eaten a fleeting glimpse of
their own dusky charms in that mirror
of Nature.
A coronet of the waxen, star-like
blossom of the Clematis adorned the
thick tresses of one, crimson Waratah
gleamed from amid its glossy foliage
above the brow of a second, and the
sweet, graceful, lithe Mistletoe was
woven cunningly in and out of the ebon
locks of another, and trailed far down
in tangled masses over her shoulders.
Other maidens had woven wreaths and
chaplets from the bright flowers, which
abounded everywhere in that spot so
favoured by Nature that it was im-
possible almost to find a space on which
the foot could rest without crushing
some sweet bloom.
Little knew or cared these dark-
skinned daughters of the forest that
brighter diadems than theirs gleamed
upon the pale fair brows of proud
maidens in other lands ; their diamonds
were the sparkling dew-drops, which
had caught the first rays of the sun as
he rose, and held them captive for a
brief space in many a rainbow hue. For
turquoises, had they not the pale blue
bell ? While jewel-like gleams of
amethyst, sapphire,and emerald adorned
the woods around.
And not more rarely could jewels set
in gold by the cunning artifice of man
shine out from the tresses of the pale-
faced maidens than did these gorgeous
gems of Nature when contrasted with
the ebon locks, and darkly polished skins
of these her wandering forest children.
Many a self-satisfied smile parted
the full, ruddy lips of Makooi’s followers
as they bent aside to glance at the
reflection of their dusky charms in the
still waters, and more than one stray
tendril of the snowy Clematis was
readjusted by the dark hands of its
wearer, as she passed onward in the
wake of the elder woman.
A low, yet distinct “ coo-ee ” came at
last from beyond the thick belt of
ti-tree which margined the opposite
shore of the river, and immediately a
quiver of excitement ran through the
group. “ Epmarrah!” they cried,
almost simultaneously, and Makooi,
turning round, made a signal to one of
the young women to approach her.
“ The boat, Leonalle,” she said, and
quickly the girl sprang down the bank,
and in another moment she had drawn
from beneath the overhanging wattle
boughs the fragile canoe, and seizing
the long paddle wherewith the vessel
was propelled, she stood for a moment
erect as she pushed the boat from the
sand whereon it had rested, the next
instant, her figure gently swaying, now
to the right, now to the left, was seen
forcing the canoe across the lake-like
stream.
“Eumarrah has booty, then, since
he requires the boat," murmured one of
the girls to a companion, as they
watched the progress of the canoe.
“ Guess what it may be 1 ”
“ Some bright shells for the necklace
he promised you,” said Pillah, as her
wide mouth spread into a laugh, not
without a tinge of raillery in her
merriment.
“He would not need the boat to
bring those safely to our grounds,”
suggested Tainore. “He would have
swum across quickly enough, if that
were all his burden.”
An exclamation of surprise from
Makooi, who had been watching the
boat as it crossed to the other shore
cut short any further surmises between
the two. “It is Eumarrah, himself ! ”
she cried. “ But what does he bring so
carefully on his shoulders, that he steps
into the boat as though he feared to
harm his burden 1 ” And the woman
puckered her brows curiously, as she
watched the operations on the other
side. All the other women now stood


anxiously beside Makooi, as they too
saw the tall, well-built figure of the
man, whom all had recognised as
Eumarrah, descend the sloping bank of
the river, slowly and carefully, sup-
porting tenderly as it seemed with his
hands the burden which rested upon his
shoulders.
They watched him enter the canoe,
balance himself cautiously therein, and
marked his directions to Leonalle, who
in an instant, at a signal from him,
plunged unhesitatingly into the water,
and grasping the bows, drew the
slender craft across the stream.
Ere it touched the strand beneath the
slope upon which the women stood, the
whole band rushed to meet the new-
comer, who stepped from the canoe as
carefully as he bad entered it.
“ Welcome home! my son,” cried
Makooi, as she laid her hand upon the
shoulders of the splendid young savage
who stood before her. “ What have you
brought us ? ”
“ A white picaninny, mother. See,
she sleeps ; do not awaken her ! ” But
his caution came too late, for the
younger women, who had drawn in-
quisitively near while his mother
addressed Eumarrah, seeing the long
fair curls,which,escaping from amid the
furry skins which enveloped the child,
had uttered loud cries of amazement,
and the little one raising its head to
look upon the crowd of unclad savages,
cried snarply.
Eumarrah looked annoyed at this
interruption, but lie at once removed
the burden of which he had been so
careful from its resting place, and
placed the child upon the smooth sand
of the shore.
Then he spoke a few words in a low
voice to Makooi, and immediately, in
obedience to a signal from her, the other
women retired out of hearing.
“ At last, then, you have succeeded,”
said the woman. ‘‘ And this is the child
of our enemy ? ” and she laughed
maliciously. Then she stood with folded
arms and gazed upon the hapless,
innocent babe, which still rested upon
the sands at her feet.
Eumarrah watched his mother with
some anxiety. But little emotion was
betrayed by her stolid features, and for
some moments the silence was unbroken
save by the low sobs of the child as her
weeping subsided.
But at length Makooi stooped,and was
about to grasp the little one fiercely.
Eumarrah interposed and placed himself
between them. “ You will not harm it,
mother ?” he pleaded. “ See how fair
it is! ” and he unfolded the many
wrappings which covered the form of
the child.
Fair enough, indeed she was, even
though the tears so lately shed had
left disfiguring marks upon her cheeks,
and dimmed the brightness of her
hazel eyes, and the sunny curls were
matted and neglected as they fell
around her. The small mouth was
quivering yet, as the child glanced
from Makooi to Eumarrah, and
instinctively drew near the latter as
if to claim his protection. The savage
sat beside her at once when he saw this
appealing gesture, and he murmured
words to her which, although she
understood them not, seemed to soothe
her.
“ I have brought the child, to you,
mother, as you bade me,” he cried.
“ But she has done our tribe no wrong,
and I will protect her. The man who
stole your daughter—my sister—is
punished now in the Joss of his home,
and this, his child, which he shall never
see again ; let this content you. I have
kept my vow ! ”
“ Warnee shall speak to you of this, ”
muttered the woman ungraciously, and
she strode away towards the camp, leav-
ing Eumarrah to follow with the child
Tenderly he lifted the tiny maiden
once more to her throne upon his
dusky shoulders, and then moved
slowly in the direction just taken by
his mother.


CHAPTER II.
“ For bis eyes have been full with a smoulder-
ing thought,
And he dreams of the hunts of yore.
And of foes that he sought, and of fights that
he fought,
With those who will battle no more.”
KENDAL.
WARNEE was chieftain of one of
the largest and most formid-
able of the aboriginal tribes
with whom the white settlers of Tas-
mania had to deal in the early days of
colonisation. Peaceable and unoffend-
ing naturally, the gradual but steady
encroachments of the whites upon their
hunting grounds, as well as many un-
provoked and cruel assaults upon their
people, had, at the time of which this
story tells, led to a series of reprisals by
the aborigines upon their unwelcome
neighbours.
Warnee,with his tribe,being encamped
in their principal hunting ground—
the region called by them Pialumma, in
the vicinity of Ben Lomond,—resenting
some interference with their prior right
to certain portions of the forest lands,
had made an attack upon the homestead
of awhite settler. Skirmishes extending
over several days followed, with vary-
ing success, but at last a party of the
white men, mounted upon fleet horses
and well armed, made a night attack
upon Warnee’s camp, surprising the
natives while they were asleep, and
in the confusion which arose during the
general dismay and darkness, not only
were many of the aborigines slain, in-
cluding a son of the chieftain himself,
but many of the young maidens of the
tribe were carried off,one of them being
a youthful daughter of Warnee and
MakooL
Although they never succeeded in
ascertaining the fate of this maiden, the
tribe did not hesitate to attach the
blame of her abduction to the man with
whom they had so recently been ex-
changing Hostilities, Keith St. Hill, a
young Englishman, who, with his wife
and two infant children,recently arrived
in Tasmania, had been induced by the
liberal offers of the Government to
take up a large tract of land in the
district over which Warnee had hitherto
reigned, his dominion being, until then,
undisputed.
For generation after generation had
the ancestors of Warnee owned all the-
mountains and valleys of Pialumma;
there were the vast forests wherein to
track down, and catch the timid
kangaroo and wallaby,- the brightly
plumaged birds belonged to them alone,
and for whom else didthe agile opossum
surrender at once its life and the furry
covering of its body! Year after year
had not Warnee and his tribe watched
the tiny golden balls of the wattle
swell and hurst forth into bloom so
that all the land was clad in splendour t
How well they knew each giant of
the forest, remembered every streamlet
as it dashed impetuously over its
brown and rocky bed ere it mingled its
clear waters with those of some deeper,
calmer stream ! Familiar to them, not
alone from the associations of a life-
time spent amid these wilds, but by
reason of the legends which tradition
had preserved to the tribe, were every
steep, tree-crowned summit, each ferny
moss-carpeted glade.
And no less dear than familiar were
all their well-known haunts ; here, a
sheltered glade beside the deep cool
waters of a stream overshadowed by
great tree ferns, beneath whose inviting
shade they rested during the summer
noontide, or there a nook at the base
of some steep hill which protected them
from the chilling winds of winter, and
yet permitted them to court the wel-
come warmth of sunshine.
Amid the depths of the sombre forest
reposed the relics of many a brave,
and reverently moved the tribe as they
passed by the spots made hallowed to
them by the presence of their dead. For
so great an awe possessed the Tas-
manians of those days, when death
severed their family ties, that the name
of a departed one was never again
mentioned among them, nor any
reference made to him. Nevertheless,
his memory lingered with the relatives
and friends as something too sacred
to be touched upon.
Household gods, such as civilisation
prizes, they had not, it is true, for the
great vault of heaven was their canopy,
the soft, springy turf theircarpet. They
needed not tables, chairs, nor couches ;
and yet they possessed one element
which they treasured with jealous care,


for although the household was to them
unknown the household fire was
theirs.
Certain members of the tribe had the
care of this, and when they departed
from one huntingground for another, the
greatest precautions were taken that the
firesticks which they invariably carried,
should not be extinguished. Individual
families possessed, when they were in
settled quarters, their own household
fires, and the members disposed them-
selves around this at night when they
sought repose.
Even in their summer, when the
tribes but required fire for their rude
cooking, the viands once prepared, the
embers were carefully raked together,
and covered up so that they might
easily be re-kindled into a blaze.
■ The dismay and anger which filled
the breasts of Warnee and his savages
may easily be gauged by the feelings
which might be expected to animate
those of a peaceful settlement of
civilised beings were a horde of bar-
barians suddenly to descend into their
midst, assume to themselves the right
of possession, and treat as tresspassers
the original owners.
Such had been the bitter experience
of the Pialumma tribe, as one settler
after another marked off and occupied
selections of the hunting grounds which
had belonged to them and their
ancestors for countless ages. Week
after week they found the area within
which they were permitted to remain
unmolested growing more circum scribed,
until at length, driven by hunger and
the impossibility of obtaining in their
old haunts the game which had been
their chief means of subsistence, they
sought and found among the flocks of
the settlers upon their own grounds
that food without which they could not
exist.
Swift was the vengeance which over-
took the tribe as the owners of the
flocks and herds which now peopled the
forests tracked the dark hunters to
their mountain fastnesses, and for the
first time in Tasmania’s history made
the hills resound with the sharp crack
of the musket.
Deadly was the havoc which such
■weapons made in the ranks of the
unclad savages, and although the latter
possessed long spears and waddies,
which they well knew how to wield, the
dusky warriors fell as three to one of
their opponents in the skirmishes which
so frequently took place. And at last
the Pialumma tribe, compelled te yield
to the superior devices and stratagems
of the invaders of their once peaceful
grounds, retired to other regions,
whither as yet the white men had not
penetrated.
Few of the families composing the
tribe over which Warnee was the
acknowledged chieftain but had to
mourn in silence over some gap in the
once careless, happy circle. Some
among them had lost a father, husband,
son or brother ; while others had seen
their wives or sisters carried ofi as
booty. And thus, shrunken in numbers,
that once prosperous tribe left sadly
behind them their loved mountains
and valleys to seek other hunting
grounds of which perchance their
enemies might know not.
Many a dire threat of vengeance did
Makooi utter to Warnee ere they left
their home, and as the sun was sinking
behind the lofty summit of Eageroppa
(Ben Lomond), beneath whose sheltering
height the tribe had known its happiest
hours of careless freedom, she drew her
husband and son apart from the rest of
the tribe, and pointing with her right
arm extended towards a thin column
of smoke which curled and twisted as
it ascended into the clear sky, and then
dispersed amid the clouds until it
became invisible, touching at the same
time the sacred amulets which hung
suspended from the necks of Warnee
and Eumarrah, she cried,
“ Chief of the Pialummas, Warnee,
and you, Eumarrah,their chieftain to be,
swear to me by these unnamed relics of
our race that ye will not rest until the
robber who dwells there below has felt
the sting of a loss like ours. Accursed
be he and his ; may his home lie in ruins
around him, and may his arms seek in
vain for the child he holds most dear ! ”
As the woman uttered this male-
diction, she drew her grand form
to its full height, with chest expanded.
Her eyes, blazing with intense hatred,
were widely distended, and every nerve
was quivering with intense excitement.
To the superstition with which the


tribes regarded all that appertained to
the dead, whose bony relics were worn
by many of them, Makooi knew she
should not appeal in vain, and both
Warnee and Eumarrah touched with
reverent fingers the relics which she
had indicated, and repeated the oath
she gave them.
One long, passionate, yearning gaze
they fixed upon all those dear familiar
surroundings among which they might
roam no more as happy, unfettered
forest children, and then turned tear-
fully and speechlessly away to rejoin
the tribe.
Henceforth their camp by night
would be beside strange streams, their
hunting grounds beneath the distant
hills, towards which they now turned
their reluctant footsteps, hoping, while
fearing, that there they might be
permitted to roam unhindered.
CHAPTER III.
All things above were bright and free,
Lithe squirrels darted here and there,
And wild birds filled the echoing air
With songs of liberty.
T AvfITJWTT Attr
LONGFEILOW.
«HEKE was great excitement
in the camp when Eumarrah
reached it, following in the
wake of Makooi, who, albeit
she was feeling exultant at
the thought that the child of
her enemy was in the hands
of the tribe, bore a sullen
demeanour in consequence
__ of Eumarrah’s avowed de-
termination to protect the captive.
The elderly men of the tribe,who had
been reclining at ease during the time
in which the women were erecting the
tents, now awaited Eumarrah’s arrival
with a great show of interest. One of
them, Nanbaree, proceeded to interro-
gate him, “Where is Warnee, thy
father 1 Where are our sons 1 ” “ They
will be with us within the hour. See
that all is ready for them,” he replied.
Then, turning from the old men, lest
they might further ply him with
questions, he moved towards a tent
before which were grouped three or four
of the young women wno had awaited
his coming with Makooi. “ Pillah,” he
said, and one of the dusky maidens
advanced towards him, “You are _my
friend ; will you take this little one into
your tent, and harm her not?” The
S'rl hesitated, and glanced towards
akooi, whose tent was but a few yards
distant, and the woman herself stood
by the opening thereof, silently watch-
ing all that was going on.
“Why will you not place her in
Makoors tent, Eumarrah ? She will not
be pleased otherwise ? ”
“ I would have her in your care, Pillah.
My mother has known too much of
sorrow in the loss of her own child to
care for another. Fear not, she will
not be angry.”
“Then I will take her, Eumarrah.”
And the girl advanced towards the child
which he still bore upon his shoulders,
and held out her arms as if to invite it
to her. But the ‘ bewildered infant
turned from herand clung to Eumarrah,
so that he had some difficulty in re-
moving her tiny hands from among his
thick, clustering curls. But at last he
disengaged himself, and, inviting Pillah
to seat herself beside him «n the grass,
he placed the child between them.
“ Give her some *canagongs, Pillah,”
hesaid; “she must be hungry,for she has
eaten nought to-day but a few ttaenga,
a branch of which I brought with me
from the grounds of Pialumma. The
bright red colour enticed her fancy, and
when she awoke from her slumber, she
partook of them eagerly.”
“ I have gathered some, Eumarrah.
They are in the gunyah yonder, and she
shall have as many as she will. How
fair she is ! Are all our enemies like
this one 1 ” she asked, and she touched
the bright curls of the child curiously,
and peered into her face, as though
wondering how anything so comely
could be evil. The little one resented
this scrutiny, and once again drew near
to Eumarrah.
“ Our enemies are all of her colour,
'Cranberries. tNative Cherry.


Pillah, and they are all, all evil (for he
had divined her thoughts). She too will
be evil when she becomes a woman,
unless we teach her to be the friend of
our race. She is not evil yet, though,”
he said pityingly. “Take her now to
the gunyah, and if she weep, as she will
surely for a time, give her the cana-
gongs, then sing to her the lullaby, and
she will sleep, for she is weary. But her
couch must be of the softest grass,
Pillah, and I will give you the furs
wherewith to cover her. for the pican-
niny must be kept warm, or she may
die.”
Eumarrah carried the little captive
to the entrance of Pillah’s gunyah,
beyond which he might not pass, for
she was not of his blood. Pillah took
the child from him and bore it within
the enclosure, for it was, like all the
other structures of the kind, nothing
more than a shelter from the chilly
night winds, and consisted but of a few
sheets of bark laid closely together, and
drawn to a point at the top,where they
were tied with long, narrow strips of
bark. Just within the opening of the
gunyah was the “ household fire,” round
which the inmates were wont to dispose
themselves for sleep. But in Pillah’s
dwelling this had not yet been kindled.
The gunyah was indeed quite
innocent of furniture of any kind, and
contained nothing beyond a pile of
freshly cut and fragrant ferns.
Pillah stood for a moment within the
chamber looking at the child with
rather a puzzled expression, her great
black eyes opened to their widest ex-
tent. She seemed uncertain how to
proceed, but after a few moments
hesitation she uttered a low cry, like
the call of a bird,and presently Leonalle
and Oura, two young women of the
tribe, stood beside her. Pillah explained
to them rapidly the nature of the
charge which Eumarrah had confided
to her, whereupon, a close examination
of the little one took place.
For never before had these dark
children of the forest looked upon so
fair a vision. Unclad themselves, the
garments of the child were to them a
mystery; her long curls shining,
although now unkempt and tangled,
■were in their eyes marvels, while the
whiteness of her skin was quite as
amazing. And, singularly enough, the
child not only bore their scrutiny well,
but even commenced to return it; for
she was now becoming accustomed to
see around her only the dark faces of
the savages, and (so transient are the
griefs of childhood) she was learning to
look upon them without dread. She
was but three years old, and just
commencing to prattle intelligibly in
her own language. That, however,
would not have been intelligible to the
women among whom she now stood,
had she been able to converse fluently.
One after another of the women
spoke to her in their own liquid and
musical tongue, but the child under-
stood them not. She only cried “Mamma!
I want my mamma ! ” Then as Leonalle
touched her gown, and pointed
curiously to the shoes and stockings
she wore, Oura tried to remove the
coral necklace which was twisted round
her throat. But this she resented, and
wrenching herself free from them both,
she began to cry loudly, and Pillah
then remembered the berries which
Eumarrah had recommended her to
give the child.
From beneath the pile of ferns
Pillah drew a coarse rush basket which
had been w'oven by her own hands ; this
was_ well filled with the ripe and
luscious berries of the canagong. She
took a handful of the shining pink and
green fruits and offered them to
the child, who took them curiously
enough, as if w’ondering what they
might be. Presently she ventured to
put one to her lips, and, once within
them, the delicious flavour of the berry
was enough. She took all that Pillah
gave her, and by the time she had
eaten as many as she desired, some-
thing like a good understanding was
established between them.
“I must now hush her to sleep,” said
Pillah. “ See, I shall lay her upon the
ferns. We will sing the lullaby to her,
and then will go and make ready for
the corroboree. Warnee and the others
will soon be here.” Then she drew the
little maiden to the couch of ferns,
and without any attempt at unrobing
her, she placed her upon it, and im-
mediately the three women squatted
upon the ground, and commenced to
sing a plaintive dirge-like melody, the


efiect of which was that, notwithstand-
ing the novelty and strangeness of her
surroundings, the little captive maiden
soon slept soundly.
Then Pillah withdrew with the two
girls who were with her,and, remember-
ing that Eumarrah had promised furs
with which to cover the sleeping child,
she went to seek him. She found that
Warnee and the members of the tribe
who had been out with him upon his
raid upon the white settlement were
now within sight of the encampment,
and that all those who remained had
gone forth to meet them, save Eumarrah,
who tarried near the gunyah to learn
from her how the child fared Pillah
told him that she had supped well, and
was now sleeping. “That is well,
Pillah ; take the furs then and cover
her, the white picanninies are not like
ours, they are more tender,” and he
handed her his own mantle of opossum.
Quickly Pillah retraced her steps to the
gunyah andobeyedEumarrah’s bidding,
then, joining the other girls of the tribe,
she went forth to meet the chieftain
and his followers.
CHAPTER IV.
Thy little foot across the lawn
Scarce from the primrose pressed the dew,
1 thought the spirit of the dawn
Before me to the greenwood flew.
HOGG.
From bough to bough
Was borne the flaming terror.
KENDAL.
WARNEE, and those among the
tribewho had accompanied him
to their old hunting grounds
of Pialumma, had now arrived at the
encampment, which became imme-
diately a scene of great excitement.
Almost ere the greetings of welcome
were ended from those who had awaited
the coming of the adventurers, a dozen
fires had sprung into existence as if by
magic, and the women running to and
fro were soon preparing the food where-
with to regale their lords ana masters.
Warnee and his followers had brought
with them ample supplies for the camp,
for they had not only snared and killed
such game as had come within their
sight during their homeward route, but
they had seized, without any scruple,
several sheep which, straying beyond
the main flocks, they had intercepted.
Quickly did the women of the tribe claim
the portions which tribal custom al-
lotted to each family, and as quickly did
they cast large pieces of flesh upon the
fires, now thrusting it further within
the glowing heat of the embers, or now
snatching it back to the lessfierce action
of the heat, until at last the exact con-
dition in winch they desired to serve up
their viands had been attained. Primi-
tive indeed was the fashion in which
these dark women of the Tasmanian
woods chose to refresh themselves.
No sooner was the food prepared,
than the men of the tribe, each taking
his portion, still smoking and hissing,
from the fire, squatted upon the ground,
arranging themselves in a kind of circle.
Immediately behind them, the women
patiently awaited the discussion of the
daintiest morsels by their masters.
Without any attempt at ceremony
the meat was rudely torn apart
and ravenously devoured, and
when the men had at last satisfied
their by no means slender appetites,
they graciously, or ungraciously as
their humour happened, threw benind
them the half consumed remnants of
their banquet.
Patiently, and uncomplainingly the
women accepted so much bounty at
the_ hands of their men-folk, who, while
their wives and daughters were regal-
ing themselves, beguiled their leisure
by relating some of the perilous
adventures in which they had recently
been engaged for the enlightenment of
those who had remained either to
protect the women, or by reason of
their being unfitted for the fatigue of
the enterprise.
Warnee himself related how, after
several days of weary march, following
all the time the tortuous course of the
river on whose banks their encamp-
ment stood, and which was called by
them “Weena,” they at last came


within sight of their own land, their
much-loved Pialumma.
For many days, however, they_ had
not dared to venture beyond the limits
of the mountain range which bounded
the northern extremity of their former
territory, lest their enemies might
becomeaware of theirpresence. Neither
had they thought it prudent to light
their fires, and hence they had been
obliged to subsist upon berries, yams,
or breadfruit, when they were ior-
tunate enough to procure any. The
tender hearts of the newly snooting
ferns furnished them with many a meal,
and from the trunks of wattle trees a
luscious supply of sweet gum was easily
obtained. They were always close to
the river itself, or to one of its tribu-
taries, and so never lacked abundance
of water.
■ After a week or two, during which
some one of Warnee's party carefully
.reconnoitred the homestead of Keith
St. Hill, taking the hours immediately
following the dawn as their best and
safest time for observation, it became
apparent that an opportunity was
about to present itself for the accom-
plishment of Warnee’s revenge upon the
unsuspecting inmates of Karoola, as
their dwelling was called.
The shearing of the sheep had
commenced, and at some distance from
the house stood the sheds in which this
work was carried on. Keith St. Hill,
and all the men employed by him upon
his station, were busily occupied
throughout the days when shearing
went on, not even returning home for
the mid-day meal, but snatching a
hasty repast of bread and meat, ac-
companied by deep draughts of cold
tea, well sweetened, and liberally
diluted with milk. Not until the sun
was about to sink to rest did their toil
cease, and master and men return to
their homes, the former to rejoin his
wife and children in their comfortable
but modest dwelling, the latter to the
huts which were their quarters.
Cunningly and cautiously did Warnee
arrange his plans. Being well assured
that for some time the dwelling house of
the St. Hills would be deserted by all
save the women and children, he drew
closer to the homestead, gradually
enclosing it within a circle made by
himself and his dark-skinned followers,
and taking care to keep well within
cover of the trees where they grew
thickly, and crawling warily beneath
the short shrubby growth which
covered the spaces in which there were
no trees.
Patiently they waited in conceal-
ment until near upon the hour of noon,
when Warnee saw from his post of
observation among the thick branches
of a tree which stood within the garden
in front of the house, Mrs. St. Hill
accompanied by her two children, leave
the house, and walk slowly towards the
lawn. She led the younger child by
the hand, and was evidently directing
it in the first elements of walking, and
presently when they had reached tte
rustic bench which stood beneath a
great eucalyptus tree overshadowing
the lawn, she sat down, and the
child rested beside her. _ Meanwhile,
the elder child went roaming through
the flower beds, plucking here and there
a bloom, making in her own guileless,
happy way, a posy which she would
presently take to her mother, and claim
approval. Now and again she would call
out in admiration of some brighter-
tinted blossom than any she had
yet gathered. Then a gaily painted
butterfly glanced across the path
before her, pausing now upon the petals
of an iris, now upon a scarlet anemone.
The child gave it chase, and almost
clutched it in her eager grasp, tumbling
across the border in ner anxiety to seize
the prize, being now beyond her mother’s
sight upon the other side of the great
tree which shaded the lawn.
Quickerthanthoughtitself,Eumarrah,
who with his father was watching at
this particular point, sprang from his
hiding place, and before the child had
time to raise herself from the ground,
he had carried her off, holding one hand
over her mouth to prevent her from
screaming and so giving an alarm.
This had no sooner been done than
a signal was given by Warnee, undis-
tinguishable froin the note of a bird to
all save one of his own race, and simul-
taneously four of his tribe had glided
through the thick shrubs which
almost enclosed the dwelling-house at
one side, and placed their lighted fire-
sticks in several places, so that the house


—a wooden one, of one story only—was
soon blazing in as many different spots.
This was no sooner done than the
savages, not waiting for the alarm
which the discovery of the fire would
occasion, sped swiftly and silently away,
nor paused until all danger of the
discovery of their part in the terrible
work was over.
They took care, however, to watch the
progress of events from afar, in safety.
They watched the greedy flames spring
from one point to another of the
spots where they had started the
fire, until all that end of the house
was ablaze. They saw the alarm given
at last, and knew that the master
and men from the shearing sheds had
rushed to the homestead in the vain
hope of saving it from ruin, for scanty
were the means at hand for quelling
such a conflagration. Then, while all
at Karoola was still in dire confusion
and dismay, the Pialumma tribe, carry-
ing withthem the child of the St. Hills,
left once more their ancient hunting
grounds behind them, and moved as
swiftly as possible from their vicinity,
giving themselves no time for either
rest or refreshment until they had put
fifty miles or more between them and
the man whom they called their
arch-enemy. For many days they
travelled t hus, bearing the burden of the
child between them by turns, but
Eumarrah carried her generally, sooth-
ing her cries when she wailed, gathering
for her such food as he could prevail
upon her to eat, and ministering to
her wants in his rude way, but always
gently and tenderly. He bathed her
face and hands in the clear waters of
the stream, by which they bent their
course, he spread for her the soft,
luxuriant grass which formed her couch
by night, and on which he laid her
sleeping after he had “ crooned ” over
her, till her tired eyelids drooped, and
she forgot in sweet, dreamless slumber,
all that had so lately happened to her.
More than a w eek had now elapsed
since the burning of Karoola, and the
capture of St. Hill’s child, and the little
one’s outbursts of grief were becoming
daily less frequent, and less vehement.
During the recital of this narrative
of his exploits by Warnee himself,
Makooi, who sat in the outer circle with
the women, paused frequently during
her occupation of discussing the frag-
ments of her husband's meal to utter
some sound significant of her approval
and delight at the accomplishment of
the vengeance for which she had
yearned, and to which she had bound
husband and son by the most sacred
oaths of their race. Now, indeed,
she reflected, would she enjoy the cor-
roboree which was to celebrate the
return of the heroes.
Many expressions of satisfaction were
heard in other directions as well, for
Makooi was not alone in the bereave-
ment she mourned and resented, and
many a son or brother slain, a daughter,
wife, or sister carried off, by those whom
the aborigines regarded as aggressors
and persecutors, was deemed to be in a
measure avenged when Warnee’s recital
ended.
Makooi clapped her hands, and
immediately every savage sprang erect,
the remnants of the feast were removed
and the dance began.
Softly and slowly came the music of
their chant at first, and as quietly
moved their feet, then as the sound of
their voices rose, so did the feet,
arms, and bodies of the dancers move
in accord with the measure until
all the dusky forms seemed to be
bounding and leaping over the
grassy banks which sloped down
towards the calm waters of the Weena,
across whose unruffled bosom streamed
the ruddy reflection of the great fire
which was always in the midst of a
“ corroboree.”
Grotesque imitations of the move-
ments of animals,birds, or fishes formed
a part of the programme, and the
young men of the tribe sought by their
proficiency in this accomplishment to
find favour in the lustrous eyes of their
dusky inamorata.
For some hours the merriment of the
corroboree continued, and only ceased
when from fatigue the performers of the
principal dances were compelled tc desist.
The corroboree fire extinguished, the
tribe now sought the shelter of their
gunyahs. The small household fire
within the entrance of each of these
was gleaming steadily and brightly, for
each tire was a glowing heap of bright
embers, perfectly smokeless.


The maidens of the tribe occupied
gunyahs with their mothers; the
males of a family slept round a
fire of their own. The gunyah
of Pillah accommodated Moorina, her
mother, Abaroo, her mother’s sister, who
was a childless widow, and Leonalle and
Oura, sisters, whose father and brothers
had been slain in some of the tribe’s
encounters with the whites, while their
mother had been abducted.
Fatigued as she was by the exertions
and excitement of the corroboree,
Pillah yet assured herself that the new
inmate of her bark tent was sleeping
calmly ere she stretched herself beside
the other girls, and soon all were wrapt
in slumber deep and undisturbed.
CHAPTER V.
“ It lies among the sleeping stones.
Far down the bidden mountain glade,
And past its brink the torrent moans
For ever in a dreamy shade.”
KENDAL.
fTRANGE, indeed, was the
scene upon which the cap-
tive child looked on the
morning after her arrival at
the native camp beside the
river Weena, now known by
the name of South Esk, the
broad basin of which lay to
the eastward of the group of
gunyahs,of which the settle-
ment consisted.
The child had slept quietly all night.
The fatigue of the rapid journey she
had made, and her long exposure to the
air had told upon the little frame
hitherto so carefully nurtured and lov-
ingly tended, and sweet sleep came to
her as the boon to be prized above all
others.
But the women of the gunyahs
were up and without the enclosures
before the first rosy streaks of dawn
were flushing the sky, and _ the
clatter inseparable from a simul-
taneous movement of so many
people aroused the child. It was not
easy for the infant to realise what had
happened to her, but she had learnt her
first lesson of severance from parents,
sister, home, and scarce expected now
to meet with a familiar face. Her
morning bath, the dainty toilette, fol-
lowed by the carefully prepared repast
she had already been obliged to dis-
pense with, and only a vague feeling
of alarm and wonder as to what might
happen next filled her mind. Pillah
raised the child from her fern couch,
and led her forth with such expressions
of encouragement and kindness as she
could command, and although the little
one understood not their meaning, she
knew by the tones of Pillah’s voice that
their import was kindly, and accom-
panied her dark-skinned guardian un-
questioningly.
Pillah conducted her to the rendez-
vous to which all the women of the
tribe were at the same time bending
their footsteps—a secluded spot on the
margin of the “ Basin.” Seating the
child upon a moss-covered rock Pillah
and her companions were not long in
arranging their morning toilette. One
af teranother they plunged into the water
and swam out boldly to the centre,
diving, floating, swimming by turns, as
though in their native element. Breath-
less with surprise at so novel a scene,
the child watched without making any
attempt to quit the seat whereon Pillah
had placed her. And when at last she
beheld the dark forms of the native
women emerging from the water, drip-
ping with its crystal drops, and saw
them tossing their woolly heads as they
Eressed the moisture from their hair
efore they indulged in some little
frolicsome exercises intended to hasten
the drying of their bodies, she laughed
aloud, and clasped her little hands as
if in glee at a performance that had
been arranged for her special benefit.
Pillah, having concluded her own
morning toilette, now approached her
young charge and signified to her by
signs that she, too, had better submit
to some experiment of the kind, but
when she eyed the once dainty costume
of pale blue cambric, with its frills of


lace, the white muslin pinafore, now.
alas ! soiled and crumpled, she seemed
puzzled, for she guessed that to enter
the water encumbered with such cover-
ings would scarcely be desirable. The
little girl herself solved the problem for
her by holding out her little hands as
if knowing the reason of Pillah’s hesita-
tion. A quick gleam of intelligence
passed between the two, and in another
moment Pillah and the child were
beside the stream where the water was
shallow. Here all the ablutions that
seemed at the time possible were per-
formed, Pillah bathing the tiny white
hands that contrasted so strangely with
her own so dark, yet not unshapely.
Then she splashed the water over the
sunny curls, shaking them free from
the tangles which marred their beauty,
and holding them out so that breeze
and sunshine might dry them quickly,
soon marked how they fell into their
natural curl again.
Satisfied then, that she could do no
more to improve the child’s appearance,
she moved with her up tne bank
towards the gunyahs, where by this
time the men, having completed their
morning ablutions, were lounging about
in various attitudes ; some sharpening
with keen-edged stones the points of
their long spears, others fashioning new
weapons of wood, newly cut from trees,
while others again were hardening
the points of those already made by
charring them slightly in the embers.
The women soon busied themselves
in preparation for the morning meal,
these being as a rule of the same rude
kind as has been described when the
supper was in progress. Occasionally,
however, as at present, the repast was
agreeably varied by the addition of
eggs filched from the nests of the
numerous wild birds which were fre-
quently found in this favoured region.
That of the native hen, or the “ lanna ”
of the aborigines, was most frequently
found in such spots as these, upon the
thickly-wooded margin of a stream,
and a goodly supply of the lanna’s eggs
had been collected on the previous day
by the women in readiness for the
morrow. Roasted in the hot ashes, they
formed no contemptible portion of their
breakfast, and they were besides supple-
mented by juicy morsels of the wild
fowl, which, feathers and all, were cast
into the fire and there broiled.
While the women were busying
themselves over the morning meal
Eumarrah came towards Pillah, and
relieved her of the child, in order that
she might be free to attend to her
duties. The little one ran to him gladly,
for his was the most familiar face
among the crowd of dark-skinned men
with whom her lot had so lately been
cast. Only the light of a kindly heart
had ever beamed upon her from his
great expressive eyes ; his wide mouth
always became more wide with smiles
for her, and the liquid utterances which
fell from it bore only words of sooth-
ing tenderness.
She now clung to him as though she
recognised in him a friend from whom
she did not wish to part, and as she
slipped her soft baby fingers within
the strong muscular hand of Eumarrah,
within which they seemed to lie like
rose leaves newly fallen, a great resolve
entered the heart of her savage captor,
that naught of harm should come to her
while his life remained with which to
defend her.
Eumarrah kept the child beside him
at the morning meal, and so contrived
that her place there was between him-
self and Pillah, who sat as usual with
the women in the outer circle awaiting
their turn. Some roasted eggs the
little captive ate readily enough, for
they were not so unlike the breakfasts
to which she had been accustomed, and
when Eumarrah removed the shell for
her, and with a delicate instinct
scarcely to be expected from one un-
versed in the usages of civilisation,
pierced the inner portion with a sharply
pointed piece of wood, thus handing it
to the “ white picanniny,” as her
captors called her, she received it from
him with as little distrust as though
she had been sitting at the break-
fast-table at Karoola.
The meal over, and the fragments
disposed of, the domestic cares of the
Fialumma women were for the present
at an end; neither sweeping, nor
garnishing were theirs to perform, and
as a plentiful supply of provisions still
remained wherewith to furnish forth
future repasts, the immediate necessity
for replenishing the common larder did


not present itself. As there was then
no obligation to hunt the game, to dive
for shell-fish, or seek for berries and
roots, the women of the tribe were at
liberty to pass the hours which inter-
vened between the morning and even-
ing repasts as they listed, for the
aborignes had not the civilised need
of a mid-day meal.
Makooi, having concluded her repast,
summoned Warnee and Eumarrah to a
family council, and in order that they
might not be disturbed during their
deliberations, she led the way herself
to a secluded retreat. Within the shade
of closely interwoven shrubs of various
kinds, which entirely excluded the rays
of the sun, it mattered not how fiercely
he shone without, moss covered rocks,
so regular in formation as to bear a
close resemblance to a shallow flight of
steps, invited repose. This sequestered
spot had once been the bed of a small
tributary of the Weena, and indeed,
when an excess of rain caused larger
tributaries to overflow, the surplus
waters again found their way thitner,
and so kept green the thick, abundant
moss which covered as with a carpet of
rich velvet this fairy bower.
As “ Mossy Dell ” it still exists for
modern explorers, although the hand of
the vandal, who rejoices in destruction,
has shorn it of its pristine beauty, and
neither clematis, woodbine, nor other
beauteous climber of the woodlands
clothes it as with a veil to conceal its
cool, inmost recesses.
Such a profusion and variety of
these covered this natural bower at
that period, that Makooi lifted the
trailing masses with some effort, and
sweeping them back, she held them
thus until her husband and son had
passed through at her bidding.
She seated herself, and when Warnee
and Eumarrah had followed her ex-
ample, the latter, listlessly drawing
from amid the tangled evergreens that
enclosed the space some blossom-tipped
sprays, began to toy with them until it
should please his mother to speak.
Warnee also appeared to prefer that
his sable consort should commence the
conversation, and he squatted himself
with something like a resigned expres-
sion at her feet.
For the days had gone by wherein he
had shown his authority over his gin by
dealing her savage blows of the waddy,
the persuasive method by which the
aborigine trained his wife to habits of
obedience, and Makooi’s head still bore
many traces of her lord’s affectionate
handlinc. But she had now reached
that age wherein the women of the
tribe ceased to be regarded as mere
drudges made to minister to the wants
of the superior sex, and were instead
looked upon as oracles of wisdom,
whose counsel was sought upon all
important occasions, and whose de-
cision was invariably final.
For a brief space after the entrance
of the trio into the bower, silence pre-
vailed, but at last Makooi, seeing that
both men awaited her pleasure, began.
“Eumarrah, I am here to ask you
what you intend to do with yonder
white picanniny 1 I claim her as mine.
Should not this be so, Warnee ?” Warnee
looked from his wife to his son, and
replied slowly, “We have kept our
oaths to you Makooi ; we have taken
the revenge we swore to have upon our
enemy, for our daughter, Kittanah. We
have taken his, what more would you ? ”
“ I would that she should die. In the
midst of the tribe let her be slain !”
replied Makooi ferociously.
Then Eumarrah cast aside the sprays
of clematis which he had been twining
about his fingers, and sprang to his
feet, and confronting his parents,
exclaimed, “If aught of harm be done
to the white maiden by one of our tribe,
I will avenge her. And, mother, if she
die among us, no more will your son
be seen in our hunting grounds, no
longer will he dwell among his people.
If she disappear, no child of your race
shall remain to you. Be satisfied, our
enemy has suffered, and every day,
every hour in which he knows not the
fate of his child, brings him fresh
sorrow. Besides, and here he sought
to excite the self-interest of his listeners,
“we shall train the child to our life.
She shall be one of us, and may yet do
us greater services living than if she
were removed by death. It would be
wiser for us, believe me, mother, to
preserve the picanniny’s life for the
aid she may one day render us. _ Think
well of this, hnd let her remain as a
hostage with us, in safety.”


The young champion of Keith St.
Hill’s child stood awaiting the effect
of his words upon his mother. A con-
flict of emotions was evidently going
on within her. The wild desire for
revenge which had been with her daily
ever since the abduction of her young
daughter was as strong upon her as
ever. But no less strong was the
maternal feeling she entertained for
the only child now remaining to her
—Eumarrah. She could not give him
up, even for the sake of gratifying her
hatred of the man whose child was now,
as it seemed, within her grasp. And
too well she knew that Eumarrah was
not one to utter idle threats, and that
if the child were harmed he would do
all that he had said. At last the strong
will of the woman triumphed over her
passions, and the wisdom of her son’s
counsel became apparent to her. After
all, the child could not well escape, and
might yet become an instrument in her
hands, with which either to work
further mischief to the detested whites,
or to gain some advantage for the race
with whom her lot was now cast.
Makooi turned towards Warnee and
asked, “ What say you, chieftain ? You
have heard what Eumarrah said, shall
we keep the child ? ”
“ Our son speaks wisely, let us abide
by his counsels,” replied the sagacious
Warnee, who had not been slow to
observe the effect of Eumarrah's argu-
ments upon his wife.
Eumarrah gave a deep sigh of relief,
for well he now knew that while Makooi
recognised the policy of guarding the
captive for the sake of future benefits
which might be attained, she had noth-
ing to fear among the tribe, and that
she would be watched and protected by
every man and woman of the Pialum-
mas.
Before quitting the leafy retreat in
which the conference, so momentous to
the heroine of this story, took place
Eumarrah consulted his mother as to
the future management of the child,
recommending that as Pillah had the
present care of her, she might be per-
mitted to continue that responsibility.
Makooi consented, and agreed that
Pillah, under the immediate direction
of Eumarrah himself, should be answer-
able for the child’s well-being and
safety.
The name by which she should
thenceforward be known among her
captors was also determined, and
Younah she was called from that
hour.
CHAPTER VI.
“ For X have learn’d to know and feel —
Tho’ losses should forgotten be—
That still the blank at my right hand
Can never be made up to me!”
HOGG.
THE early struggles which Keith St.
Hill had, in common with all the
pioneer settlers of Tasmania, been
obliged to make before being able to feel
established with anything like a degree
of security in his home, situated in the
midst of the primeval forest, seemed
well nigh at an end upon that bright
November morning, which heralded the
darkest page of his life’s history.
As he sat at breakfast with his wife
in the pretty morning room at Karoola,
their little three-year-old daughter,
Keitha, making a third at the repast,
a happier family group could scarcely
have been found anywhere in Tasmania.
“ I shall be glad when this tiresome
shearing is finished, Keith,’’ said his
wife, as she handed him his coffee.
“ The days are so long for me and the
wee ones now that you are absent
until evening ! ”
“ Yes : I do not doubt it, sweetheart.
But after all there is so much to be
thankful for, inasmuch that the feeling
of security we possess since we have
been assured that the Pialumma
tribes have at last abandoned their
hunting grounds in our vicinity
removes the necessity for so much
vigilance about the homestead. For
months now not a single sheep has been
missing, and our clip of the season
promises to be an excellent one, so that.


all being well, you and I, with our
bairnies, may yet be able to spend a
good portion of the winter with our
friends in Hobart Town. Does not that
Srospeot make amends for a few hours
ally absence now, Ida 1 ”
“ Indeed it does ! ” answered Mrs. St.
Hill. “It will be delightful to feel that
one is again living in the midst of
civilisation. I often wish that our lot
had been cast in a less rerapte an d isolated
region than this. But there ! lam not
going to murmur, and send you off to
your work thinking that I am dis-
contented, when I am really feeling so
bright and happy at the prospect of
our fortunes improving so rapidly that
before very many years wa may be
returning to dear old England ! ”
“ That is my own bright little wife.
But there goes the bell, Ida ; give me
another cup of coffee, and I must hasten
away.” Draining his second cup, the
master of Karoola rose from his chair
and warmly kissed the upturned face of
his wife. Then as he passed the little
Keitha, he stooped and kissed her
bright curls as they wandered over
her forehead, saying, “Good-bye, dear
ones; spend your day as happily as you
can,” and St. Hill went out to join the
group of men whose work he supervised
and shared, for in those days most of
the settlers were obliged to perform
manual labour, thus acquiring practical
experience which became invaluable
to them in after years.
Ida St. Hill followed with her eyes
the form of her husband as long as it
was visible to her through the case-
ment window,which commanded a view
of the courtyard through which he had
to pass on his way to the men’s quarters,
and thence to the shearing sheds,
situated more than a quarter of a mile
distant from the house. Her blue
eyes were moist with tears, and her
lip was quivering as she thought of the
long hours of the day to be passed with-
out him, but she remembered his hopeful
Words ere he left her, and made an effort
to repress the regret she could not help
feeling. Turning to her little daughter,
who was already struggling to leave her
Wgh chair unaided, she said, with a
smile, “ Come along, Keitha, let us go
and see if baby Mona has finished her
breakfast; then we shall see what
Margery has to say ; and I wonder what
we shall do next f
“Feed my wabbits and dess my dollie,
mamma,” said the child, as they left the
room together.
Then Mrs. St. Hill visited the nursery
of her youngest child, rather more than
a year old, and taking the little Mona
with her, she went to confer with her
servant, Margery, an old and trusty
domestic who had lived with her since
she herself was a child, and who had
accompanied her to the colony as
maid. As housekeeper, and counsellor
upon all domestic matters, controller
or the incompetent helps who per-
Slexed mistresses then, as they do now,
largery was to the St. Hills invalu-
able. For Ida Ross had been very
tenderly brought up, surrounded by
all the luxuries and refinements of
life, in the home which had been hers,
with an aunt and uncle, who, childless
themselves, had adopted their niece,
one of a large family whose means were
not equal to the demands upon the
slender income.
Ida’s aunt and uncle, the Trevors of
Eosscrag, determined from the time of
their adoption of the child that she
should be to them as their own daughter
and eventually their heiress. Con-
sequently, all that money could secure
was lavished upon Ida, who was
educated without any view to the
possibility of her one day being obliged
to meet with some of the privations
which fell to the lot of the less favoured
of fortune.
But all the advantages Ida enjoyed
atßosscrag counted as naught when
weighed against the love of handsome
Keith Rt. Hill, and when, after a very
short acquaintance with him, Ida
informed her adopted parents that he
was her accepted lover, whose suit she
wished them to recognise, she had the
courage to brave their displeasure
rather than obey their commands and
give him up.
For St. Hill was not wealthy, nor
had he any prospect of becoming so,
unless he could manage to push his
own fortunes, and the Trevors had no
confidence in his ability to do so to
such an extent as would warrant him
to aspire to the hand of their heiress.
After a brief contest with her rela


tives, who endeavoured vainly to imbue
her with their worldly views, Ida and
her lover settled the matter for them-
selves by marrying.
The Trevors were greatly offended,
and refused to renew friendly relations
with the young people, who thenceforth
were obliged to seek in other quarters
the assistance and influence they re-
quired.
After two years of struggles and dis-
appointment in England, the _St. Hills
resolved to try their fortune in one of
the new colonies of the southern hemi-
sphere, being encouraged to do so by
the glowing accounts of the wealth
which might be acquired in pastoral
pursuits in Tasmania —a land most
highly favoured by nature —sent to
Keith St. Hill by his old friend, Ted
Manning.
Without the aid of her faithful
servant and friend Margery Bell, who
had followed the fortunes of Ida from
the time of her marriage, Mrs. St. Hill
would have fared badly on her arrival
in the colony, and her lack of experience
would have been a serious hindrance to
the domestic comfort of the household.
But Margery intervened between her
mistress and all that was disagreeable
to her, as far as it was possible for her
to do, relieving her of the innumerable
Eetty cares which would have made her
fe tar less tolerable.
Thus Ida St. Hill, having as usual
held her morning conference on house-
hold matters with her trusty Margery,
was at liberty to dispose of her morning
withoutanyanxiety. She went first of all
with Keitha to feed and admire the
child’s pets. Then an hour was spent
in designing and arranging costumes
for the dolls, explaining various coloured
plates in the picture books, laughing
and romping with Mona.
The morning was so bright and
sunny, the birds were twittering so
merrily among the trees and shrubs
which surrounded the house, that Ida,
taking both the little ones with her,
went out into the grounds.
She held little Mona by the hand,
while Keitha flitted about here, there,
and everywhere, running now and
again to her mother and holding up for
her admiration some newly-discovered
flower.
When at last the baby Mona seemed
to tire of toddling, Ida led her to the
seat beneath the great tree on the
lawn, and then drew from her apron
pocket a letter which she had received
from an old friend and companion of
girlish days in England The mail—a
rare and eagerly expected event in
those days—had arrived at Karoola
the day previously, and although the
letter had been read immediately, it
would bear reading again and again
many times before being placed aside.
The interest which everything con-
nected with her much loved associa-
tions in England had for Ida so
completely engrossed her attention
while glancing through the closely
written pages of the letter, that she
did not notice that Keitha had wandered
beyond her sight, nor would she have
been alarmed had she observed it, since
the grounds were well enclosed, and
the only danger she would have recog-
nised was that of the little one wander-
ing away into the bush beyond.
Mona was busily pulling the petals
from a little heap of flowers that lay
upon the rustic bench, left there by
Keitha a moment ago, a magpie was
carolling blithely a triumphant song
in the branches of the tree which
sheltered the spot from the already too
warm rays of the sun ; scarce a breeze
rustled the leaves around, and Ida her-
self, as she sat making the central spot
of as fair a picture of springtide love-
liness as even England itself could
boast, felt as she looked up from her
letter to turn a page, and take in with
a swift glance the beauty of the scene
upon that never-to-be-forgotten morn-
ing, that life was a sweet and joyous
possession to her, blest as she was in
this far-off land with the love of a
husband such as hers, and with all else
that life had worth giving !
But almost in the same instant, she
shivered as though a cold breeze had
swept across her, and she looked
curiously around to see what could
have occasioned the sensation. A cloud
had come betwixt the sun and the spot
where she sat. “ A passing cloud,” she
thought. But the clouds seemed to
thicken, and at last overshadowed the
lawn itself. “ There will be a shower,”
she said softly, “we had better return


to the house. Come Mona, darling.
Ah ! where is Keitha 1 Keitha ! ”
she called, but no answer came. Then
came a puff of thick, black smoke, and
Ida saw now what it was that had
darkened the sky above her. There
was fire somewhere. She ran quickly
across the grass of the lawn, until she
came in view of the house she seemed
to have left but a moment ago. At the
same instant the fire which had been
smouldering in the end of the house
farthest away from the domestic offices
in which Margery and her help were
both engaged, burst into a great flame,
and Ida stood paralysed with horror.
She seemed quite incapable of action
for several minutes, during which the
cruel fire gained ground, and soon the
bay windows of the drawing-room,with
Ida’s bedroom adjoining and the
nursery, were enveloped in one great
sheet of flame. ' ’
Then her senses seemed to return to
her, and picking up her cliild she ran
with swift footsteps to the court-yard
at the further side of the house, and
seizing the bell-rope she sounded an
alarm upon the great bell which was
used to summon the men to meals or to
arouse them in the morning.
Margery came flying out from the
back door, followed by the maid-of-all
work, to learn the meaning of so un-
usual a clamour at that hour, and
seemed aghast to see her mistress ring-
ing frantically. But soon Margery
realised the danger too, and she re-
lieved Mrs. St. Hill of the task of sum-
moning masculine aid, for all the men
of Karoola were away at the shearing.
“ Go, ma’am, with the children, to the
run, and meet the master; you will be
safer there, and can do nothing here.”
Wise advice for Margery to give, and
as Ida looked around for her children,
she seemed to remember then that she
had not Keitha with her when she dis-
covered the fire.
“ Keitha must be in the house, Mar-
gery,” she cried in agonised tones. “ I
missed her just before I saw the blaze ;
she must have returned before I noticed
her absence from my side. Oh ! ” she
cried wildly, “ Keep Mona here; I
must go and find her/’ She spe d wildly
across the courtyard, before Margery
could prevent her, calling as she went
to Keitha, and in a few moments more
was within the doomed building.
Loud sounded the alarm over the
hills and valleys of Karoola, nor was it
long before its warning notes fell upon
Keith St. Hill’s ears, as he stood within
the shearing sheds counting out the
sheep as they were relieved of their
fleeces.
He paused in his occupation to listen,
for the bell was never sounded but as
a summons to meals or to call the men
from slumber, and greatly he feared
that its tones boded ill to his home.
“ Come, all of you,” he cried, “ there is
something wrong up at the house ; that
bell isan alarm!” And every man sprang
at once to his feet, regardless of half
shorn sheep that struggled to get free.
Once outside the shed, the thick
clouds of smoke that rolled towards
them told what the danger was, and as
they hastened up the slope w hich led
to the homestead, the flames shooting
up into the clear sky were plainly
visible. Karoola was doomed, every
one of them saw; although every
exertion was made to save the house,
the means at hand were useless to stay
the progress of such a conflagration.
St. Hill’s first task upon arriving at
the scene was to assure himself of the
safety of those dear ones he had left so
lately in security, as he fondly imagined.
Margery stood with the trembling Mona
in her arms, and replied to her master’s
query, “The mistress would go back to
the house to seek for Miss Keitha. She
bade me stay here with the baby, sir,
but I am sure the child is not within.”
Then St. Hill dashed within the
burning building, large fragments of
which were continually falling to the
ground, and calling loudly to his wife,
sought her in every room and passage
through which he passed. As he drew
near the door of the morning room,
which was in that end of the house
where the fire raged most fiercely, he
found that Ida had fallen across the
threshold and was unconscious, the
smoke having almost stifled her. He
lifted her hastily, and bore her to the
courtjard, all his anxiety concerning
the damage to his home and its contents
being lost in his dread lest Ida should
perish. As he passed through the
group of men, who seemed helpless, he


called out, “Margery, come to your
mistress, she is perhaps dying. Howard,
you save what you can. I must stay by
my wife.”
Back to the lawn he carried her, and
laid her gently upon the bench she had
quitted so recently. Then he sought
water from the well, not far distant,
and bathed her temples and hands.
By these and other means he restored
his wife to consciousness at last, and it
was only when she looked up at him,
and murmured “ Keitha ” that he recog-
nised the absence of their elder child.
Then he realised that Ida had been in
quest of her when she was overpowered
by the smoke, and leaving her with
Margery he returned to make a search
for the missing one. As he reached the
courtyard, however, the roof fell in, and
he knew then that if his child were
indeed within the house, all hope of her
safety must be abandoned. So rapid
had been the progress of the fire upon
the inflammable material of which
Karoola was constructed, that it was
found impossible to save more than a
very few articles of furniture, chiefly
from the kitchen and rooms im-
mediately adjoining All the principal
apartments with their contents had
been beyond hope of salvation from the
moment of Ida’s discovery of the fire,
and the amount of water available was
impotent to do aught beyond sending a
shower of sparks upwards, followed by
dense columns of smoke.
Returning to his wife, St. Hill ques-
tioned her concerning her reason for
supposing that Keitha was inside the
burning house, and then learned that
she had missed the child from her side
in the garden, and supposed she had
gone inside. A search of the garden
and the grounds in the immediate
vicinity proved fruitless, and then Ida
refused to be comforted any longer by
vague surmises that her child had only
strayed away, and abandoned herself to
paroxysms first of grief, then of despair,
and persistently believed that Keitha
had perished in the flames.
St. Hill’s task was not a very easy
one. Harassed himself by grave doubts
that the child could be safe somewhere,
he was obliged to conceal as well as he
could his terrible misgivings, and soothe
as much as possible his stricken wife.
His first anxiety was to procure for her
a suitable shelter, since there were no
buildings available at Karoola for a
lady’s accommodation. Nothing now
remained but the men’s huts, with their
scant and rude furnishing.
St. Hill desired Howard, his working
overseer, to saddle one of the horses and
ride over to the nearest station, Mr.
Gray’s. “Talumba,” and crave shelter for
his wife, child, and women servants.
This was quickly and freely accorded,
and Mr. Gray himself returned with the
messenger to assure the St. Hills that
Talumba should be to them as a home
while they had need of it. Deeply he
sympathised with the young settlers in
the great misfortune that had over-
taken them.
Not more sadly had the Pialumma
tribe gazed backwards upon the hills
and valleys, the forests and plains, that
were theirs no more, than did the St.
Hills when, ere the shades of evening
fell upon the still smouldering heap <3
ruins which had been their happy home,
they reluctantly turned from it to seek
shelter beneath another roof. Ida gave
one great, heart-broken sob as she felt
that in turning from the spot she was,
as it were, abandoning the child to its
fate. But her husband was deaf to her
tears and entreaties that she should be
allowed to stay anywhere near the spot
lest the child might be found. For he
too saw there was no hope.
CHAPTER. VII.
Muse on the last farewell I leave behind,
Breathe a deep sigh to winds that murmur low
And think on all my love, and all my woe.
CAMPBELL.
IDA St. HILL never returned to
Karoola. For many weeks after the
disasters which caused the ruin ef her
home, and the loss of her first-born,
the hapless young mother lay hovering
between life anddeath. At first for afew
days a faint hope lingered with her that
Keitha might yet be found, if she had
strayed away, and it was pitiable to


mark the mute questioning of her eyes
as they sought her husband’s face each
day on his return from Karoola to
Talumba. And it was when even this
faint shadow of a hope, for it could be
called no more; died within her, that
she gave herself up to utter despair.
Several days of intense, almost speech-
less, misery culminated in a violent
attack of brain fever, which lasted so
long, and was of so serious a nature
that the doctor who had been brought
from Campbell Town,a distance of some
forty miles, doubted if her reason would
ever regain its normalhealthy character.
Of one thing he was certain. Mrs. St.
Hill should never be permitted to re-
turn to the scene of the calamity, which
pressed so heavily upon her, and he
recommended her husband to remove
her as far as possible from the vicinity.
When at length her youth, naturally
good constitution, and the careful nurs-
ing she had triumphed, and Ida became
convalescent, it was decided that her
husband should accompany her to
Hobart Town (as the metropolis
was then called), and leaving her
for a time with the Mannings, who
had on the first tidings of St. Hill’s
misfortune warmly urged him to take
up his residence with them at Sandy
Bay ; return himself to Karoola, and
make arrangements for disposing of his
station,since,as it wasnolonger possible
for Ida to live there, it was practically
useless to him. But when St. Hill,
having seen his wife comfortably es-
tablished with his old friends, war
about to return to Karoola, Ida clung
to him so passionately, imploring him
not to leave her, that he yielded to her
wishes and remained with her at the
capital. In consequence of this change
of plan, he advertised that Karoola was
to let, already stocked, and in a short
time he had the good fortune to secure
a desirable tenant.
When 'all their affairs had been
settled, the St. Hills concluded to take
a small cottage in Hobart Town not
very far from the residence of the
Mannings, their small income enabling
them to meet the expenses of living in
the quiet, unostentatious manner which
contented them.
But a change of fortune came to the
bereaved ones soon after they had
settled down as resignedly as possible
to the existence they had planned
for themselves. For in time the
English mail brought to Ida a long
letter from her aunt, Mrs. Trevor,
telling of the sudden death of her
husband, and imploring of Ida to
return to Rosscrag, accompanied by
Keith and her children. The lonely
widow said she yearned for the society
of her adopted child, that her only
desire now was to make peace with her,
and to have once more her society. If
Ida would only consent to do as her
aunt wished, her old home was awaiting
her ; she should once again be regarded
as the heiress, and the temporary es-
trangement be forgotten.
Although loath to leave the land in
which they had lost their child, the
St. Hills felt that nothing could be
better for them than to return to their
native land. With the prospect of
wealth awaiting them in the future,
the reason for exile no longer existed,
and although deep down in their hearts
the memory of their lost one would
never be erased, both St. Hill and his
wife felt for the first time something
like peace of mind when once they had
despatched the letter to Mrs. Trevor,
accepting her invitation.
About a year had elapsed since the
date of the great calamity at Karoola,
when the St. Hills embarked upon the
sailing ship “ Southern Cross ” en route
for England, and many a tearful adieu
did Ida exchange with her friends the
Mannings, the Grays, of Talumba, who
journeyed to the capital to wish them
bon voyage, and numerous other friends
who regretted to lose them.
Tasmania, as its shores receded from
their last, lingering glances, seemed to
Ida as one vast grave wherein her lost
child lay, she knew not in what par-
ticular part of it; and such yearning re-
grets as only a mother’s heart may
know were hers when she felt that she,
might look upon this land no more.


CHAPTER VIII.
Together at the dawn they rose.
Together shared the noon’s repose.
By fountain or by stream.
And oft as evening’s skies were red
The heather was their common bed.
SCOTT.
| y EFOEE the spring had passed into
summer the little Youn&h had
3-J grown, accustomed to the free,
forest life of her wild captors. The
■women of the tribe vied with each other
in rendering her services and attentions
such as they were not wont to give to
their own picaninnies. One reason for
this, apart from the winsome beauty of
the child, was that it was soon recognised
that thesurest way to Eumarah’s regard
was to seek the favour of his little pro-
tege. For her the daintiest morsels were
always reserved at meals, a deviation
from the rule which prevailed amid all
the Tasmanian tribes, for with them
women and female children, being con-
sidered inferiors, were obliged to put
up with the remnants of the food,
after the men and youths had been
first satisfied.
Younah had naturally enough turned
with disgust from the rudely prepared
viands which were discussed with so
much relish by the aborigines, and for
a long time she could not be
induced to partake of anything but the
roasted eggs, which, it happened,
fortunately, were plentiful enough at
that season, so these with such fruit as
could be obtained formed her daily fare.
Of the delicious berries of the canagong
she never wearied. For yams and bread-
fruit she soon acquired a taste.
Many times the names of “ mamma,”
“ papa,” and Mona fell from her lips
in questioning tones as though the
child wondered why they did not come
to her, but the free wild life of the
forest seemed to possess so many
charms for her that sne quickly became
contented with her lot, and entered
with enjoyment into the gambols and
play of the numerous black picaninnies
of the tribe.
When the child, henceforth to be
known as Youn&h, had been carried off
from Karoola she was prettily dressed
in a frock of delicate blue cambric with
a pinafore of muslin and lace, and
smart shoes and white thread socks
covered her feet. Besides these she
wore a coral necklace of many rows,
twisted curiously, and secured by a
thick clasp of chased gold, shaped like
two interlacing hooks, the design being
one of great antiquity. Indeed the neck-
lace, which had been once worn by
Younah’s mother, was one of the Trevor
heirlooms.
Younah had not dwelt very long
among the Pialumma tribe before her
pretty clothes were torn in scrambling
through the wild undergrowth when
playing with the other children. The
sharp-edged rocks, too, soon did serious
damage to her thin shoes, and when
these had to be cast aside as useless, a
council was held by Pillah and her
most intimate companions to decide
the question of replenishing the child’s
wardrobe, for Eumarrah had signified
that she should continue to be clad as
nearly as possible after the fashion of
her own race.
Makooi, to whom, of course, nothing
that went on among the women could
remain unknown, expressed an opinion
that Younah should follow the customs
of’the tribe among whom she dwelt.
But her son over-ruled her in this,for he
pointed out that the delicate white
skin of the child would not bear so much
exposure as the dusky hides, so amply
covered with hair, or their people. If
she were to be preserved to them, they
must duly consider all that would
contribute to her present health and
comfort, so that her growth and
development should in no way suffer.
Makooi was obliged to agree with
Eumarrah, and admitted the wisdom of
his councils. Her son being actuated,
however, by the real regard he had for
the child, and not by the consideration
of any prospective advantages to be
derived either by his tribe or himself.
But he knew very well that only
such arguments as he chose to advance
would have any weight with his vindic-
tive mother, and he felt that her protec-
tion could only be assured to Younfih by
the knowledge that it would result in
some advantage to herself eventually.
The immediate consequence of the
deliberations of Pillah and her com-
panions was the arrangement of a
costume for Younah to replace her
sadly dilapidated garments. Without


needles, thread or material to work
with, it might be conjectured that
these simple girls had undertaken a
difficult task, but these children of
Nature seldom allowed difficulties to
stand in their way, and they soon
overcame these. From the dried skin
of a small wallaby they fashioned as
neatly as they could the shoes of
those she had hitherto worn, but
they dispensed with any substitute
for socks: the seams of the shoes
were securely fastened by means
of holes, which were punched through
by sharpened pieces of wood, made
something after the fashion of the
stiletto used by needlewomen. Thin
strips of skin were passed through,
thus connecting the various parts quite
as effectually as a needle and thread
would have done it. A tunic woven of
dried grasses was easily contrived, for
the women were experts, at that kind
of work, and occupied many of the
hours when they were not hunting
in squatting upon the ground and plait-
ing the long grasses and rushes into
baskets, which they used for conveying
fruit, oysters and other shell-fish from
place to place. The tunic descended from
Younah’s waist to the knees, and ter-
minated in a deep fringe of the grasses
which were there left unplaited. Above
this she wore a garment which was
simplicity itself in its construction, for
it consisted of a small square made of
two or three platypus skins drawn
together in the same way as the seams
of the shoes had been, a hole being left
near the centre, through which the
head was thrust, thus forming a kind
of cloak which gave protection to the
chest as well as the shoulders, while
it left the arms quite unimpeded.
YounSh, now so strangely attired, re-
tained none of the garments of civilisa-
tion, wearing only with her primitive
costume the coral necklace, which no
one presumed to take from her.
Following timidly at first the daring
exploits of her small, plump, dark-
skinned playmates, the little girl
ventured at last to plunge into the
stream as boldly as they, and soon she
dived and swam as well as any of her
companions.
She watched how they climbed the
trees in search of the opossum, or birds’
nests, and was not long before she
could emulate them in such feats.
Her eagerness to capture some booty
to take back to the gunyahs after the
chase was a source of great amusement
to _ the women, and they took some
palps to teach her the artifices by
which they secured their prey.
But Younah could never be induced
to kill anything that she had taken,
and she would endure a good amount
of raillery upon her weakness in this re-
spect, a weakness she could not conquer.
She loved all the wild creatures which
dwelt in the woodlands around her,
the birds with their brilliant plumages,
the shy, small, four-footed animals that
bounded across her path as she pushed
through the undergrowth, and even
the bright-eyed, brown-striped lizards,
with which she would sometimes sit
and play, taking them up and caressing
them, for they had no fear of her, and
would dart backwards and forwards
around and about her quite confidently.
The wide, calm waters of the basin
with the densely wooded margin, the
place where first she came to this
strange yet beautiful home, the roaring
waters of the cataract as they rushed
and foamed, leaped and tumbled over
the great fragments of basaltic rock,
which some great convulsion of nature
had cast down when yon hills had been
riven asunder, and then after eddying
round in many a curious little whirl-
pool, settled down soberly to join the
less impetuous waters of the sister
stream ; the gigantic cliffs which hung
beetling and frowning over this secluded
gorge, had for Younah charms of their
own, separate and individual. For
with each locality was connected some
strange story of ancient days—days,
she had heard the tribe speak of when
giants, great and wonderful, had dwelt
in the land.
Eumarrah had told her—and did
she not always believe what he said t—
that the hill had been rent in twain by
a giant who was chieftain over a
Eowerful tribe of his ancestral race,
ecause he had sworn _ to bring the
waters of the Weena, to join with those
of the Webba (North Esk), and now
these two flowed together, making a
mighty river which went out to the
great ocean, far away.


Pillah and Oura took her to the
Giant’s Grave and showed her where
he slept, beneath the huge mound which
still bears his name, and where the roar
of his cataract is plainly heard. Near
his grave they pointed out the figure,
now turned to stone, of the great Druid
who kept watch at the grave for so
many years, and at last, dying there,
became petrified.
All these old time stories interested
the child, although they puzzled her
very much, and she would escape to
the solitude of the forest as often as she
could steal away from Pillah or theothers
and muse on all that she had heard.
She would wander about the rocks
which bounded the foaming cascades,
sometimes scale the seemingly unas-
sailable sides of the great cliffs which
overhung the gorge, and when sought
by some of the tribe towards the even-
ing hour, her small figure would often
be discovered on the top of the highest
cliff of all which overlooks the waterfall.
A “ coo-ee ” from Eumarrah would
cause her to descend swiftly from her
perch, and rejoin the tribe at the even-
ing meal.
Her couch was still spread within
Pillah’s gunyah, her mattress the dried
fern branches, her covering the opossum
fur, and sweetly and serenely there she
slept as though she had never known a
more luxurious bed.
But Younah disliked the approach of
winter, for that season always brought
about the migration of the tribe. The
necessity for seeking another kind of
food at that period —food which was
not to be obtained near the banks of
the Weena, obliged the Pialummas to
move to other hunting grounds.
These were situated in a sheltered
region near the sea-shore, where they
could procure supplies of shell-fish, of
which they were very fond, though for
some reason they had an unaccountable
aversion to any other kind of fish.
The long marches which the tribe
accomplished when moving from one
hunting ground to another would have
been impossible to Younah but that she
was carried as soon as her little feet
became weary, and there were always
broad, strong shoulders ready to bear
her.
CHAPTER IX.
Innocent child, and snow-white fawn !
Well are ye pair’d in yonr opening dawn,
Thus should the pure and the lovely meet.
BRYANT.
"TSTEAES passed on, and still Younah
remained with the tribe which
had captured her. She had readily
acquired the languageof thePialummas,
and gradually all knowledge of her own
tongue faded from her memory. As
she _ grew up among the young
aborigines of the tribe who were now
her companions and playmates, the
dawning intelligence caused her to
wonder at the difference of colour be-
tween herself and them.
One day she asked Eumarrah how it
was that she was not as the Pialummas.
Eor a time the savage was at a loss
how to answer her, as it had been for-
bidden that any one should disclose to
Youn&h the fact that she belonged to
another race. Of the whites, the natives
around her always spoke in terms of
hatred or contempt, and Younah her-
self had learnt to think of the enemies
of the tribe as wicked men who had
stolen the land which belonged rightly
to others. She had no idea whatever
that she herself was one of them.
In a little while Eumarrah came to
Younah with a rush basket, and seating
himself beside her among the sweet
scented musk and flowering shrubs
which fringed the edges of the Cataract,
he said in the musical tones of that
language which would not bear trans-
lation into our vernacular. “ See,
Younah, you asked me a few days ago,
how it is that you are of a different
colour to all whom you see around you.
I could scarce have made you under-
stand then, had I attempted to explain
the strange frolics which Mature some-
times indulges in. I think you will
now. Look at these.” And he opened
the little basket and drew forth two


small animals, one of which was covered
with dark grey-brown fur, and its
sharp little black eyes seemed to peer
curiously at Younah as she took it from
Eumarrah’s hand.
She caressed the sleek, smooth coat
of the little creature as she said, “ Why,
this is a young lyenna * ! Why have you
brought it here ? ”
Even as she questioned him,
Eutnarrah brought another from the
basket, and putting it beside the one in
Younah’s arms said, “ These are the
young lyenna of one mother. I took
them from her pouch myself. See ; they
are alike in all save colour, for the one
I gave you first is dark, while this last
is perfectly white, with pink eyes.
There is no greater difference between
you and the dark-skinned children of
our race, than you find here between
these two creatures of the forest. Can
you say why these are not alike 1 ”
_ The child made no reply for a con-
siderable time, during which she ex-
amined the little kangaroos minutely.
She looked puzzled as she concluded
her scrutiny, then she said, “I see that
these are alike in all respects, save
that of colour only, but I am not like
the rest of our tribe in many things
besides. My hair is long and flows
over my shoulders, while neither Pillah,
Leonalle, nor Uura, nor any ot them
have anything but thick, short, woolly
hair. Besides, I can see from the reflec-
tion of my own face in the broad basin
of the Weena ere I dive that my
features are not like theirs ! ”
Euraarrah saw that his attempt to
explain the mystery to Younah by the
“ Albino ” theory was not altogether a
success, so he only shook his head and
said, “ You will be altogether like us,
Younah, some day,when we have passed
beyond the dark forest all must traverse
before they reach those bright plains,
■where there will be no cruel men to
deprive us of our hunting grounds, as
here. There, you will be dark-skinned
also! ”
Younah knew no religion save that of
these wandering people, perhaps the
ttost primitive creed held by any race.
They had taught her to believe in a
Good Spirit, who caused the sun to
*Kangaroo.
shine, who sent abundant prey to the
hunting grounds, and gave them all
they needed ; they had told her, too, of
an Evil Spirit, who was always abroad
in the darkness, which was the work of
his hands. He it was who sent sickness
and death, and caused all their misfor-
tunes.
So the child accepted without ques-
tion all that Eumarrah told her, and
sought to know nothing more. But
sometimes dreams came to her wherein
it seemed she could distinguish other
formsthan those of her daily companions,
and faces would bend over her then
whose colour was even as hers. _ The
memory of these dreams would linger
with her for many days, during which
she cared nothing for the pastimes of
her companions. She would move
away from them restlessly, and seek
some secluded spot, and endeavour
vainly to recall the visions which had
seemed so beautiful in her dreams.
A little native girl about Younah’s
own age was the child’s most constant
companion, and these two were staunch
friends. One day she questioned her,
saying, “ Natone, do you ever see faces
bending over you in the night 1 ”
“No ! Younah, never. I am always
afraid to look about in the night, when
I wake, but I seldom do. Do you 1 ”
“Yes,” replied Younah, “but I do not
open my eyes nor look about either ; the
faces I see come to me when I have my
eyes shut, and I seem to know them
then, as if I had always known them,
but as soon as I open my eyes in the
morning, they go away and I cannot
see them any more 1 ”
Natone opened her great black eyes
widely as she listened to Younah.
“ Do you see them every night 1 ” she
asked.
“ No, indeed,” Younah answered sadly.
“ Sometimes not for many moons; and
Natone, they are not like you, nor any
of our tribe ; they have skins like mine,
and long hair too ! ”
Natone only seemed mystified atthese
confidences of Younah’s. The a,ctive
little creature, who seldom was still for
many minutes at a time during the
hours of daylight, soon sank into a deep,
dreamless slumber, when her limbs
were stretched out for repose within
the gunyah.
23


“ Tell no one else what I have said to
you then, Natone!” Y’ounah charged
her, and her dusky little friend pro-
mised to keep her confidence.
But Ybumlh's instinct seemed to
point that she was not as those among
whom she lived, for as she grew older
she marked that in many respects she
was treated by the tribe with greater
favour than was bestowed upon their
own picaninnies. For she was always
clad in some kind of garment, her food
was often daintier than theirs, and she
was never required to perform the
slavish services which were exacted
from the young women and female
children of the tribe.
She swam, fished, climbed the trees
after the opossums, and hunted with
them, but only because she chose to
do so. She knew that to Eumarrah
she owed many of the advantages she
enjoyed, because he alwaysdirected the
women to see that her wants were
supplied, and his commands were im-
plicitly obeyed.
The child wondered, too, what caused
Makooi to look so strangely at her, at
times, for the old lubra could not con-
quer the aversion she had felt from the
first moment in which she had looked
upon the face of her enemy’s child.
Y'ounah hadasecretdreadof Eumarrah’s
mother, and seldom came within her
reach if she could avoid it. But the
woman made no attempt to interfere
with the child in any way, and so far
as she was concerned the little one
roamed about with the children of the
tribe unhindered.
After Eumarrah’s attempted explana-
tion to Younilh of the apparent reason
for a difference in the colour of their
respective skins, she had adopted as
her pet the small white kangaroo with
which he had sought to illustrate his
solution of the problem. She had soon
tamed the timid, gentle creature, and
thenceforward these two white crea-
tures, so strangely introduced, were
seldom separate. The small white
lyenna hopped after its mistress where-
ever she went, and when Younah dived
into the water to swim, or climbed
trees whither her pet could not follow
her, it patiently awaited her return.
CHAPTER X.
“ Past the ridges where the coast, abrupt,
Dips greyly westward, Circe’s strong-armed
son swept ddtrn.”
KENDAL.
THE Pialumma tribe had been for
about a week settled in their
winter quarters near the _ sea-
shore, “ Loonabeya,” in the vicinity
of Port Dalyrmple, as the mouth of the
river Tamar, formed by the confluence
of the rivers Weena and Webba, was
called by the early Tasmanian settlers.
The season was still in its earliest
stage, and was marked by that mild-
ness and serenity which frequently
characterises the advent of winter in
this favoured clime. A warm, sunshiny
day, succeeded by a clear, cool evening
in which no suspicion of frost lurked,
tempted the tribe to linger on the beach
by tne sea later than was their wont at
that time of the year.
Younilh and Natone had followed
Pillah and Leonalle to a cluster of
great rocks, and seating themselves
upon those most conveniently placed
for comfort were watching the tide roll
in, and admiring the great crested
waves as they came thundering on,
and broke into rippling, foamy sheets
of water upon the sands at their feet.
Both children loved the sea, and
never tired of watching its ceaseless
motion. Indeed most of their time was
spent in its immediate vicinity during
the time the tribe dwelt in this region,
and Younah’s love of the sea did much
to reconcile her for her absence from
all her loved haunts by the banks of
the Weena.
Upon this evening, she and Natone
sat upon their perch of rock, clamber-
ing from one ledge to another as the
tide advanced, and the great majestic
waves as if in sport, sent up showers of
spray, and then mockingly drew back.
Pillah and Leonalle walked on to-
gether, along the beach, leaving the
friends where they loved best to be,


until their path led them beneath the
overhanging boobyalla.
Presently two other figures stole out
from amid the dense shrubbery which
had concealed them from view, and
silently joined the girls. Before long
the two pairs separated, Leonalle and
Amboo, who had long been acknow-
ledged lovers, moving on in advance of
Pillah and Manalagaua, who were but
just becoming mutually alive to each
other’s perfections.
Pillah’s bright black eyes beamed
with pleasure as she glanced upwards
at the bold and manly savage who
walked beside her, for these simple
forest maidens were unversed in the
civilised art of coquetry, and made no
pretence of concealing their satisfaction
at a favoured lover’s admiration.
The witchery of the hour and the
scene fell upon both of them as Mana-
lagau’s strong arm stole around Pillah’s
form and he murmured in her ear
“ Pillah ! mena loyeta nena.” * No words
were needed to assure him of the girl’s
sentiments towards him, and their
betrothal had no other witness than the
slowly rising moon as she came silently
and slowly from behind the thickly
wooded hills behind the lovers, and cast
her silvery radiance upon the heaving
bosom of the sea before them. They
accepted the omen, and hand in hand
they returned towards the camp,
whither Youn4h and Natone had but
just preceded them, warned by, the
deepening shades of evening that they
migntnot linger longer. For, with their
belief that the Spirit of Evil was
always abroad during the hours of
darkness, these simple creatures took
care to return to their fires before
the last lingering rays of daylight
faded.
A happier light shone in Pillah’s eyes
that night as she joined the other in-
mates of her gunyan, who all knew the
reason of her happiness ; they had no
need to ask, for there was little dis-
simulation among these forest maidens.
The name of Manalagaua passed from
one to another, and Pillah bore their
raillery very well. When this had been
indulged in to some little extent, Pillah
drew aside with Youn&h, who had been
quietly listening.
• “I love you!”
“ Youn&h ! ” she whispered, “ I shall
have to leave your gunyah soon. Shall
you miss me ? ”
The tears sprang to the 'child’s eyes,
as she answered, “ Indeed, I shall, dear
Pillah, I wish you would not go. Must
you ? ” she pleaded,
“ Yes, Manalagaua wishes it so. I
am going to be his wife. But we shall
often be together Younah ; only fancy,
if I had been taken away by some other
tribe, as so many of our maidens have,
you might never have seen me again.
But Manalagaua is good and true, he
will be your friend too. Is not that
good?”
Younfth shook her head sadly, and
toyed idly with the strings of coral she
always woreroundher throat. Then she
said quickly, “ Pillah ! tell me who gave
me these shells ; no other maiden of the
tribe wears a necklace like this. Is it
because my skin is not like theirs ? ”
Pillah, startled by the question,
seemed at a loss what reply to make.
Then she said to satisfy the child’s
curiosity, “ Eumarrah brought it to you
when you were a mere baby, he said it
should not ever be removed ! ”
“Ah ! Eumarrah has always been so
good to me, I think he is sorry for me
that I have not the same colour as our
tribe.”
“Go to your couchnow, YounMi! See,
Leonalle, Oura, all of them, are already
asleep by the tire.” And each sought
her reposing place, and before the moon
had risen high above them, they too
were sleeping softly, and no sound
broke the stillness of the night around
the camp save the beating of the surf
upon the sandy shore below.
Next morning, as soon as the sky
became flushed with the first streaks of
dawn, the tribe was astir, and parties
of women and girls ran down to the
beach for the morning plunge into the
sea. Laughing and chattering they
leaped and dived, and swam until they
were almost breathless from their exer-
tions, when, after a brief rest, during
which they shook out the moisture
from their woolly heads, they scrambled
about over the rocks in quest of the
shell-fish of which they were so fond.
Great quantities of these delicacies
were consumed by the tribes, as the
immense heaps of shells, the accumula


tions of years, which still exist in
various parts of the island, testify.
Oysters, “ mussels,” limpets, peri-
winkles and the many other kinds of
crustaceans which were so plentiful all
along the coasts, they roasted in the hot
ashes, and ate while they were quite
warm with great relish.
The women and girls enjoyed the
sport and the excitement of fishing for
these dainties, and were generally pro-
vided with some kind of rush bag or
basket in which to carry their booty.
Youn&h was as eager as any of the
tribe to secure a good haul of shell-fish,
and was always repaid for her labour
by a few words of approbation from
Eumarrah.
Upon this, the morrow of Pillah’s
betrothal, Younah, feeling that she
would so shortly be separated, in a
measure, from the one who had always
ministered to her childish needs,
followed her about from rock to rock,
as though she would have as much of
her companionship as possible. Pillah
was touched by the child's affection,
and kept away from the others as the
hours advanced. Many a handful of
large limpets would she drop quietly
into Younah’s basket which hung across
her shoulders, so that it should be the
sooner filled, until she feared the burden
might prove too heavy for her. “ Let
me take your booty also, Younah ” she
called. “ I will give it to you before we
come in sight of the camp. You will
be weary else, and we will now return,
and prepare the meal. The others, I
see have already gone back.”
_ They had strolled beyond their usual
limits that morning, for Pillah and
Younah keeping together apart from
the rest, had not noticed how far ahead
of them they had gone.
Younah stopped while Pillah relieved
her of the now heavy basket of shell-
fish, and the latter had but just swung
it on to her own shoulders, when a
stunning blow from a waddy, laid her
senseless upon the beach. The dull
thud of the weapon upon Pillah’s head
had caused Younah to look quickly
round, for she had already turned to
precede her companion homeward.
She saw then, the form of a savage who
was not one of the Pialummas bending
over Pillah, and in another moment he
had lifted her in his arms, and carried
her ott', disappearing among the thick
belt of boobyalla and shrubs which
grew along the sandy shore.
Younfth was terrified, for never before
had she been witness to such an oc-
currence. For years no such mishap
had befallen the tribe, although she
had occasionally heard references
among the girls to them.
Fearful now, lest a similar fate might
overtake her, she ran swiftly back to the
camp, overtaking ere long, in her rapid
flight, the rest of the fishing party.
CHAPTER XI.
All day, by ways uncouth, and ledges rude,
The wild men held upon the stranger’s trail
Vlhich ran against the rivers and athwart
The gorges of the deep blue western hills.
KENDAL
*AENDAL.
EEAT was the consternation
at the encampment when
the story of Pillah’s abduc-
tion had been related to
them by Younah, on her
return from that morning’s
adventures. The child
found herself the central
object of attention, as, re-
gardless of the fact that
they had not yet breakfasted, the
men' clustered round, and plied her
with questions, to which she, still
breathless and sobbing, could scarce
reply. i.
Eumarrab, seeing her distress, signed
to tlie men to leave her. Then he drew
her aside, and, motioning Manalagaua
to accompany them, he learned from
Younah what had happened.
Manalagaua listened with clenched
hands, and fiercely gleaming eyes, and,
with difficulty, could he be restrained
from starting in immediate pursuit.
“ The Tanganoeta tribe must be close
at hand,” said Eumarrah, “ It is one of
them who has seized Pillah for his wife.
We will seek them without delay, and


force them to give her up. But first
we must place the women and children
in safety.
Eumarrah then led Ycunah back to
where the women stood chattering and
gesticulating, and, commanding silence
while he spoke, he said, “ You will all
follow Makooi, who will lead the way
to yonder rocky eminence, from which
you can survey the country easily upon
every side, and which, because there
are neither trees nor undergrowth, is
safe from all danger of surprise. We
go to seek Pillah, or revenge.
Then every savage whose years per-
mitted him to join in the tribal custom
of following the enemy with a view _ to
fight, seized spear and waddy, pausing
only for a few minutes to besmear his
face with a sticky mixture of grease
and a red ochre-like clay, which they
used as a sort of war paint.
Warnee, as soon as ne and Eumarrah
were ready, uttering the fierce yell of
the Pialummas,brandished his weapons,
and rushed onwards, followed closely
by Pillah’s lover, who was burning
for revenge.
YounMi had never seen the tribe set
out in warlike array before, and her
slight form was now quivering with
fear, grief, and anticipation of further
evil. Bereft of Pillan’s protection, to
whom she was always wont to turn for
comfort in her sorrows, whatever they
might be, she knew not to whom she
could look in this dark hour.
But even as she felt her desolation,
a soft little hand took hers within its
own, as Natone stood beside her, and
whispered, “ Do not weep, dear Younah,
they will bring our Pillah back. See
our warriors are already out of sight.
Come with me ; together we will follow
Makooi to the summit yonder ; thence
we shall see when they are returning.”
Younah went with her little sable
friend, and both joined the women of
the tribe, who had already gathered up
their spoil of the morning, and, taking
the firesticks, were proceeding to the
spot whither Eumarrah had recom-
mended them.
Here the fire was kindled, and a
plentiful supply of shell-fish cast within
the glowing embers. As these were
roasted thus, and raked out with
sticks, they were eaten hastily, the usual
ceremony of waiting until the men
were first satisfied being dispensed
with by the women. For, as usual, the
old men and boys of the tribe had
remained with them.
Wearily and anxiously enough the
hours of that day dragged along, and
sadly and with dejected mien returned
the warriors of the tribe before the
shades of evening fell. For Pillah was
not with them, as the women all saw
from their mound.
Makooi hastened down the slope to
meet the men, and to hear as quickly
as possible the story of their adventure.
This was soon told, as Warnee
related to her that the Tanganootas
had already left the neighbourhood
before they had set out in pursuit.
And although the Pialummas had come
upon the still smouldering ashes of
tneir fires, and had followed upon the
trail with all possible haste, they had
not been able to come up with the
fugitives, who were in full retreat.
They had hazarded several spears in
the hope that some might find a billet,
but, as they pursued, these were re-
covered, and it was seen that they had
fallen harmlessly.
Manalagaua’s despair was touching
to witness, for he had learnt to love
the gentle girl with whom he had so
recently exchanged words of love, and
for him to know that she was now lost
to him for ever, was grief unutterable.
He sat apart, and refused to partake
of the evening meal which had been
prepared for the warriors, who had not
tasted food that day, so pressing had
been their need for pursuit. And while
his companions were satisfying the
cravings of hunger, which had been
for some hours assailing them sharply,
he buried his face in his hands, and
brooded over his loss.
Younah noticed him, and with a sym-
pathetic feeling for him whose wife her
own loved Pillah was to have been,
she drew near him, and sat silently
waiting till he should notice her
presence, with a delicate sympathy
more touching than words. Without
seeing the child, he seemed to feel she
was near, and he moved his hands from
his face, and glanced towards her. He
saw that her large hazel-brown eyes
were wet with tears, and he knew that


she too mourned Pillah’s fate. En-
couraged by the look he gave her,
Younah came still closer, and then she
laid her small white hand upon his
dark-skinned wrist.
“You could not find her then?” she
murmured. “ Oh, I am so sorry for
you too ! I have been grieving for my-
self all day, but now I weep for you,
Manalagaua! She loved you; she told me
last night that you were good and true.
Why did that bad man take her away?”
“ He stole her, to be his wife,” groaned
the poor fellow. “Even now she may
be feeling the blows of his waddy, for
that is how we tame unwilling wives.
Oh! but for one moment in which I
could slay him, and avenge her ! ”
But all in vain did he sigh for
vengeance. The Tanganoota tribe had
passed beyond their reach, and were
already far on their way to other hunt-
ing grounds.
This adventure made, as may be
imagined, a deep impression upon
Younah’s mind, and she_ began to
question Leonalle concerning some of
the tribal customs which she did not
understand.
From her she learned that Makooi
herself had been carried off, when a
maiden, by Warnee, whose savage
blows had left enduring scars, many of
which were still visible. Leonalle in-
formed her that when young maidens
were scarce in a tribe, they frequently
had recourse to tnis objectionable
method of obtaining wives ; and, when
they were in the vicinity of unfriendly
tribes, such as these Tanganootas were,
they were never secure against such
surprises as that of which Youn&h
herself had been the witness.
In a few weeks’ time all had seemed
to forget Pillah, save Younah, Mana-
lagaua, and Eumarrah, whose great
friend she had ever been ; but these
three seemed to be drawn together more
closely by their common sorrow than
before. Eumarrah and Younah had
always been attached to each other from
the time of the child’s advent into the
tribe, and now they extended their
friendship to the bereaved one, and
were able to afford him much consola-
tion in his misfortune.
The marriage of Amboo with Leonalle
followed in due course, and was
celebrated by one of the great corro-
borees of the tribe, most of whom took
part in the festivities.
Younah, who had always felt ill at
ease in the neighbourhood of Pillah’s
abduction, hailed with delight the signs
which gave promise of an early spring,
and ere the first fragrant buds of the
wattle began to burst upon the plains
inland, the Pialumma tribe had com-
menced their migration to their old
haunts by the banks of the VVeena.
CHAPTER XII.
The ro;ky summits split and rent.
Form’d turret, dome or battlement,
Or seem’d fantastically set
With cupola or miuaret.
And creeping shrubs of thousand dyes
Waved in the west winds’ summer sighs.
SCOTT.
SADDENED though she was by the
fate of her friend, Pillah, Younah
rejoiced to be once more among
her well-known and loved glens, water-
falls, and rocks. She paid a visit of
greeting to each nook with which she
had become familiar, and found charms
of Nature everywhere.
Here by Mossy Dell, the moss carpet
was fringed and bordered with the
delicate fronds of newly unfolded
maiden-hair ferns; further down, on
the damp marshy ground, through
which small, hidden streams of water
trickled onwards to the Weena,
gleamed bright tufts of golden butter-
cups from out the emerald grass.
Fairy-like bells of white, and blue, and
lilac, dotted the turf as with a pro-
fusion of jewels; daisies and convolvul
peeped out from amid clusters of broad
leaves, and the tiny purple violet, with
its lance-like or heart-shaped foliage,
added its modest charms to the scene.
Youn&h was soon roving about
among all these floral treasures, and
gathering an armful of them where-
with to deck her innermost corner of


the gunyah already erected. Fragrant,
as well as beautiful, were the tents at
this season, for most of them had
branches of the golden wattle woven
and interlaced among the boughs of
which they were formed, and they were
veritable bowers of beauty.
Younah and Natone had now a small
gunyah entirely to themselves, for,
since Pillah had been taken away,
and Leonalle was married, Younah had
craved this boon, and Eumarrah’s in-
fluence had obtained it for her ; the
only other inmate of their small night
shelter was Younah’s little white kan-
garoo.
The sweet, fresh ferns were always
piled within for Younah’s couch, and
upon themwere spread several soft, thick
furs, a bed by no means to be despised,
and one upon which the white maiden
slept calmly and sighed for nothing
more luxurious. But Natone, like the
rest of the Pialumma maidens, only
stretched her dusky limbsuponthe grass
before the fire, and disdained a softer
couch.
Soon after the return of the tribe to
their old grounds beside the broad
basin of the Weena, the two girls
remarked that an air of anxiety seemed
to prevail among the elder and sage
members. A constant watch was kept
up, and scouts were sent to reconnoitre
from the highest points accessible.
Younah and Natone marvelled what
all these precautions might portend, for
neither of them could recollect that
hostile tribes had ever trespassed
within the limits of these grounds, of
which they had been in undisputed
occupation for many years; before
arrival, indeed.
The two girls resolved that they
would be careful not to wander far
away from the adults of the tribe, lest
Pillah’s dread fate might overtake them,
for they could realise no other danger.
Eumarrah had only given Younah
aii evasive answer when she had ques-
tioned him concerning the cause of his
evident anxiety, but he commended
the wisdom of her resolution not to
stray beyond sight of the elders of the
tribe.
In the calm solitudes of the forests,
beside the rushing waters of the
Weena, or climbing the rugged cliffs
which overhung the Gorge, the last
happy hunting days of the Pialummas
were passed. The forests still abounded
with game ; the shrub-fringed banks of
the river concealed the nests of
the “ cooma ” or native hen, which
yielded them such ample supplies
of eggs in the spring ; and there were
not a few localities where oysters could
be obtained, when the longing for such
dainties possessed them. The means
for sustaining Nature were, in this
favoured region, so plenteous, that
hunting was no more than an agreeable
pastime wherewith to beguile the hours.
The only book which was theirs to
read, that of Nature, they conned
diligently, and Younah had become an
apt pupil in the lore to be gained
therefrom. She knew the properties
of every herb and root as well as any
among the tribe, and if any among
them were affected with an ailment,
could compound a remedy of bruised
leaves and juice of berries to bind
round the throbbing temples or aching
limbs of the invalid as deftly as Leon-
alle orPillah could have done.
The wild songs of the forest children
often trilled forth merrily from
Younah’s voice, as she skimmed lightly
with her moccassin-shod feet over each
well remembered glade, gathering here
a luscious cluster of the ripe canagongs
or there pausing to reach for the juicy
scarlet berries of the wild cherry-tree.
She and Natone would often return to
the camp crowned with garlands of the
waxy blossoms of the clematis, and
adorned with great clusters of the pale
green bells of the fuchsia.
One afternoon, as they were turning
homewards after one of these expedi-
tions to their favourite flower garden—
a garden which knew no tillage save
that of sun, rain, and wind-rvoices.
whose sounds were not familiar, fell
upon their ears In an instant Younfth
and Natone crouched beneath the dense
shrubs, and watched for the new-
comers, whose footsteps were now dis-
tinctly audible.
As these came nearer, the two girls,
scarcely daring to breathe lest their
presence should be discovered, peeped
through the leafy screen behind which
they had concealed themselves. They
saw two beings approach, who seemed


to them to belong to some unknown
tribe, such as they had not even heard
of. They were white men, wearing the
garb of civilisation, and they were
conversing freely as they drew near the
scrub which hid Younah and her com-
panion.
“ There seems to be plenty of game
in these woods, Colin,” said one.
“Yes, that is the fourth or fifth of
the curious, hopping creatures we have
startled since we came to this side of
the hill. We should have brought
Vixen with us ; she would have laid
some of them low.
“ Well, that is a precaution we shall
take the next time we find our way
hither. But, I say, old fellow what a
climb, and a scramble we have had to
get here !”
“ True ; but what a discovery has
rewarded our toil. Did you ever see
so charming a scene 1 How grand
those huge masses of rocks look
as they stand frowning down
upon the waters that leap and foam
over the fallen fragments which some
great convulsion of Nature has evi-
dently hurled into the abyss below.
And mark the calm tranquility of that
sheet of water above the falls. Who
knows what treacherous depths may lie
beneath that placid surface 1 " _
“ Oh ! you are growing fanciful now.
I prefer to speculate upon the possibilty
of good fishing in yonder basin, for it
looks like a basin there, lying em-
bosomed amid the hills. If ever 1 have
the energy to toil over those steeps
which led us hither, I shall come en-
cumbered with fishing tackle, on the
chance of hooking something. _ But,
now, as the sun is already beginning to
disappear behind that hill, and we do
not know the way too well, we had
better return to the settlement, before
darkness overtakes us ”
“ Eight, Colin, we have done_ pretty
well for to-day, and by the time we
return to our quarters we shall be tired
enough to turn in, almost without wait-
ing for our supper,”
And as the last sentence was spoken,
the strangers turned and walked away
in the direction from which they had
just come. Both were men still on the
“sunny” side of thirty, and were dressed
as the early settlers of those days gener-
ally were. They wore short coats of
strong, dark tweed, shirts of coloured
flannel, and soft felt hats, a costume
which was well adapted for the rough
work which the pioneers of those days
had so frequently to perform.
Not for some time after the last
sound of their voices had died
away in the distance did Younah
and Natone dare to move within
their leafy hiding-place, lest the least
rustle they might make should apprise
other intruders, who might haply be
lurking near, of their whereabouts.
And when at last Natone touched her
companion’s arm, Younah began to
tremble so violently that she seemed
incapable of moving from her position
in which she had been crouched while
watching the strangers.
Natone, deeming that her friend was
overcome with fear, tried to reassure
her, by saying that she was convinced
the strangers had gone quite away from
their vicinity, and that she was certain
no others were near them.
But all her persuasions seemed to
have no effect _ upon Younah, whose
presence of mind had apparently
deserted her, leaving her incapable of
speech cr movement. “ Come Younah,”
she reasoned, “ the sun has set, and
Makooi will chide if we linger too long
away from the others, and you know
Eumarrah himself bade us not tarry in
the woods alone. We know now that
thereisdangerindoingso. Oh! had those
men seen us, what might have been
our fate ? Come, I will help you forth.”
And the dark maiden gently placed her
arm round Younilh’s fair shoulders, and
drew her out from amid the sheltering
bushes. But Younah was strangely
silent and absorbed in thought during
their homeward walk, and heeded not
any of the surmises hazarded by
Natone as to the tribe or race to which
the strangers could belong.


CHAPTER XIII.
Forth she sprang
And with collected might a moment stood,
Fury and misery struggling in her thoughts,
Yet both impelling her to one dire purpose.
a ft- mAAirnn w
MONTGOMERY.
WHEN the two girls returned to
the gunyahs, the elders of the
tribe were discussing their ab-
sence, since the long shadows of evening
were already lying across the waters of
the Basin, and all had been bidden not
to loiter beyond the immediate vicinity
of the camp, as the day waned.
Eumarran advanced towards them
when he saw them approaching, and
there was a perceptible shade of anxiety
upon his brow, for he had detected
something in the bearing of Younah as
she came, almost supported by Natone,
which told of something beyond the
fatigue she occasionally betrayed after
a long ramble about the hills.
The girl seemed more thoughtful
than usual, and was evidently reluctant
to answer his questions with her accus-
tomed trankness, Euraarrah thought.
She was pale and agitated besides, and
he turned from her to Natone saying
“What has happened that you nave
delayed your return beyond the time f”
and he pointed towards the sun, dis-
appearing behind the hills at the base
of which their gunyahs were erected.
Natone felt no hesitation in replying,
and said quickly and with some excite-
ment “ We saw two men of a strange
tribe approaching towards us, and,
fearful lest they might discover us
alone, we hid beneath the musk and
currajong bushes, until they had gone ;
then we came out and hastened nome
as quickly as we could, but Younah
seemed so terrified that I could
not get her to move at first.
Indeed she has not got over her fright
yet, as you can see. for she has not
spoken a word since”.” “No, no Natone,”
exclaimed Younah, “ indeed I am not so
frightened now; I know that we are safe
here, but I am tired, and not very well,”
and as she spoke she raised her hand to
her brow, as though she felt pain there.
Eumarrah had started with surprise
and annoyance at Natone’s information.
Hedirectedher to accompany her friend
to the gunyah, and there minister to
her wants, while he sought his father,
the aged Wamee, and some of the most
sage members of the tribe.
After the evening meal, the elders
held a council, and discussed among
themselves the importance • of the news
which Natone had brought that even-
ing.
For the tribe had made the discovery
on this last return to their summer
quarters that a white settlement had
been established at no great distance
from the Basin, and the precautions
they had taken ever since their arrival
had been to guard themselves
against a surprise.
Until to-day they had been unable
to detect the presence of their
natural foes amid their hunting
grounds, but the knowledge that
they were not far off had filled
them with a feeling of uneasiness.
This they could not conceal from the
younger members, who were not
generally admitted to the knowledge of
their secrets, until they had learned to
wield spear and waddy to some purpose.
Makooi, as the eldest woman of the
tribe, was regarded by all as an oracle
of wisdom, so that the others naturally
remained silent upon such grave
occasions as the present until she had
spoken.
The years which had passed over the
savage woman’s head since that evening
which introduced her to the reader,
had not rendered her appearance more
attractive. The thick, short, woolly
hair with which her head and cheeks
were so abundantly covered was now
quite grey, her flesh was coarse and
wrinkled, and wide gaps showed be-
tween her large fang-like teeth. But
her great, black eyes gleamed with as
much intelligence and ferocity as in the
days when she swore to be avenged for
the wrongs she had suffered.
Their old fire burnt anew in them
now as she listened to the news that
once again the enemy was close to the
tribe, and she spoke slowly and with
suppressed passion as she said, “ If these
men who have been within our hunting
grounds to-day saw the white maiden,
they will report it to their tribe, and
soon we shall have them upon us with
their weapons of fire, against which
the spears and waddies of our people
are but as grass. She nmt die.”
31


A great silence fell upon the group as
Makooi’s dread counsel was heard.
Warnee glanced towards Eumarrah,
who betrayed no emotion, save that his
eyes were lowered, and his lips tightly
compressed, but he neither spoke nor
gave token that he had heard his
mother’s words. Nevertheless he could
feel that every man’s eyes were turned
towards him, as if this was a matter
which would concern him more nearly
than any one. For his protecting in-
fluence had shielded the captive child
from the moment of her arrival in their
camp until now. He had turned aside
with tact and skill many a malicious
shaft of Makooi’s, making her believe
that it was in her own interest that he
did so, and many a privilege was
secured by him for Younah which was
not permitted to any of her sex among
the tribe.
Makooi knew, as did every one
present at the council, that a deep
affection subsisted between Eumarrah
and the captive, who knew not that
she was a captive, so carefully had the
secret of her abduction been concealed
from her. But she did not waver from
the fell purpose which was in her mind,
and to which her voice had just given
utterance.
The tribes held the opinion of their
aged women in great respect, and
seldom, if ever, disregarded the advice
given by them upon occasions of
moment; disaster, they considered,
would certainly follow if they did.
And although an expression of deep
pity and of regret shone from every
eye, and murmurs of sympathy that
formed not into words ran through the
circle, Makooi knew that no one would
dare to gainsay her decree. The revenge
for which she had yearned, and which
during so many years had but
smouldered within her, had now burst
forth anew, and this time, she argued
to herself, only blood should quench its
flames.
“ Warnee ” she exclaimed as she saw
that no one essayed to reply “it is for
you to see that the safety of the tribe
is assured by attending to my counsels.
Let the deed be done ere the next sun
shall set. If the white man returns, he
will find no one of his race among us,and
so will depart without doing us harm.”
Havingspoken thus Makooi rose from
the ground, and left the men in council
among themselves to consider her
advice.
“ It must be done ! ” said Warnee, and
again he looked towards his son.
“ How and by whom 1 ’’askedManune,
an aged w vrrior who had followed and
fought by the side of his chieftain in
many a tray with hostile tribes.
The chief pondered for some time ere
he icplied, as though he were revolv-
ing several plans in his own mind. At
last he spoke “ Manune, you can under-
take this task, for to you I can safely
confide its execution. You will take
with you two of our warriors, and
conceal yourselves somewhere that the
maiden will surely go to-morrow. From
Natone you can learn the spots they
most frequent, and when you discover
Younah alone, alone, bear in mind, that
Natone must not learn her fate, a blow
from the waddy of him who is nearest
to her, will silence her for ever. A
heap of dry boughs, and a fire-stick
will remove all trace of her, who will
thenceforth to her companions be re-
garded as lost or stolen as Pillah was.”
Manune gave his chief the sign of
assent, and immediately afterwards the
council broke up, and the elders
dispersed to their various campfires.
Eumarrah walked slowly away in an
opposite direction to that of the
gunyahs, towards which he did not
return until all others of the tribe were
disposing themselves to rest. Then he,
too, sought his own particular shelter,
and drawing his opossum fur closely
round his shoulders he stretched him-
self out in the position he usually
adopted for slumber.
Meanwhile,Younftb, all unconscious of
her impending doom, having retired
within her gunyah, accompanied by
her devoted Natone, sank upon her
couch of ferns and rugs. Her dusky
companion busied herself by compound-
ing and applying cool soothing lotions
of bruised herbs to the brows of her
friend, murmuring the while many
assurances that she was now in safety,
and need no longer fear the strange
men they had seen.
But Youn&h stopped her, saying
“ Natone, you are wrong in supposing
that I am afraid of those strangers. On.


the contrary, I felt as I looked at and
listened to them, as though they were
friends and an almost uncontrollable
desire came upon me to go to them.”
Natone listened in amazement to this
confession, but presently she concluded
that Younah’s head was still _ affected,
for she resumed her ministrations and
said “ Ah ! you will be better when you
Lave had a good sleep. We will keep
within the gunyah altogether this
evening. When morning dawns, your
head will be cool, and you will be quite
yourself again.”
Younah stretched upon her couch as
if weary,now raised herself into an erect
position and looked at her companion
as she said, “ I cannot explain to
you, Natone, what feeling has taken
possession of me so strangely, but it
seemed to me as we lay hidden in the bush
listening to the strangers’ speech that
the language they used was net strange
to me. I do not know what it was
they said, but surely, if only in one of
my dreams, I have heard such words
before! ”
“Nay, Youmlh,” said Natone “you are
but dreaming now to fancy such things,
the morning’s light will dispel such
notions. There, lie down now, and keep
these cool, moist leaves upon your burn-
ing brow.” Youn&h obeyed her friend,
and sank back once more upon her couch,
but Natone had long been asleep within
a few yards of her, and still her eyes
were wide open, gazing as it were into
far space, away and beyond the gunyah.
CHAPTER XIV.
My moonlight way o’er flowering weeds I
wound,
Inspired beyond the guess of folly,
By each rude shape, and wild unconquerable
sound,
«HE full moon was riding
high in a cloudless sky
above the banks of the
Weena beside which the
Pialummas lay slumbering
peacefully that night upon
which Makooi had pro-
nounced the doom of
Youn&h.
„ No feeling of pity for
her hapless victim disturbed the
dreams of the aged hi bra, as she slept
on beside the smouldering embers of
her fire.
Eumarrah, alone of his tribe, medi-
tated upon the fate which threatened
to overtake his young at last.
He knew that it was contrary to all
tribal custom to gainsay the advice,
pronounced in oracular fashion, of one
who like Makooi was regarded by the
tribe as the embodiment of wisdom,
and he recognised the futility of appeal-
ing to Makooi’s clemency, and implor-
ing of her to recall her fell counsel.
The sentence had come so suddenly,
too, that he had scarcely realised the
imminence of the danger. Long after
the rest of the tribe were wrapped in
profound sleep, Eumarrah lay quite
motionless, but his thoughts were busy,
as scheme after scheme presented itself
to him for baffling Makooi.
As he was meditating thus, he re-
membered with no little satisfaction
that YounAh and her inseparable com-
panion Natone, were the sole occu-
pants of their gunyahs, and he
rejoiced that he had procured for the
youthful captive the privilege she had
coveted of sleeping apart from the
women of the tribe, since he saw that
such an arrangement would now greatly
facilitate his plans. Quietly and cau-
tiously he rose from his recumbent
position. Having purposely lain down
at a greater distance than usual .from
his comrades of the fireside, he was able
to do this without running the risk of
disturbing them. He drew well into
the dark shade of the trees which
sheltered the encampment, not ventur-
ing into the open spaces lest perchance
some wakeful eye might discover him,
and give the alarm. As he drew near
to YounAh’s gunyah, he crouched down,
and glided round the trunk of the great
tree which supported the frail structure
of which her sleeping apartment con-
sisted.


So noiseless was his approach that
not even Youn&h, wide awake as she
was, and with a sense of hearing
trained by long experience of all sounds
in the bush, detected any unusual
break in the solemn stillness of the
night, until Eumarrah’s faint whis-
per of “ Youn£Lh ! it is I, Eumarrah,
make no alarm ! ” sounded almost in
her tar.
Trained like all the forest children
among whom she dwelt to obey without
question the voice of a leader, the girl
made no movement that even Natone
could hear, but answered quickly.
“ What do you wish me to do then,
Eumarrah 1 ”
“You must touch Natone gentlv,
then say she is to follow you whither I
will lead you. Your life depends upon
the obedience with which you both
attend to my injunctions. More than
this I cannot tell you until we have
left the tribe safely behind us. I will
await you beside the trunk of the tree
which shelters you.’' Without waiting
to speculate as to the cause of Eum-
arrah’s singular mandate, Youn&h
carried out his directions faithfully.
She left her couch, and approaching
the sleeping Natone, whose dark limbs
shone like those of a bronze statue in
the moonbeams, her head only being in
the dark shadow of the gunyah, she
passed her slender white fingers over
the dusky features of her companion.
Almost as she did so, she bent over her
and whispered, “ Come, Natone ! utter
no sound, you and I must follow
Eumarrah at once, he awaits us with-
out.”
Natone sprang erect in an instant.
Another moment and they were follow-
ing Eumarrah, who still kept within
the darkest shadows, until descending
a slope of the hill, which concealed the
encampment from their view 1 , there was
less need for caution.
The girls wondered whither he was
leading them, and for what purpose,
but yet they sought not to learn from
him the reason of their strange night
excursion. Eumarrah, they knew,
would enlighten them when it was well
that they should know ; in him they
placed implicit confidence.
When they had left the gunyahs some
two miles behind them, their guide led
them within the shelter of a close thicket,
for the air was still chilly at night at
that season. Within this natural
bower, all would have been darkness
but for the gleams of light which
penetrated through the leafy screen
which served as a curtain to protect
them from the breezes which swept
down the gorge.
Eumarrah motioned to the girls to
seat themselves, and when they did so
in the manner peculiar to all the Tas-
manian tribes, he followed their ex-
ample, and then said, “ You shall learn
now why I have brought you from the
funyah, and from the tribe. YounMi,
told you that your very life depended
upon your obedience to my directions.
And I will explain. But before you can
understand the immediate cause of
your present peril, you must learn the
secret of your existence. You are not
of the Pialumma tribe ! ”
Eumarrah paused that he might note
the effect of this announcement. He
saw that the girl was agitated, for she
trembled as if with excessive cold, and
her hands were tightly clasped together,
but she did not speak. She knew that
Eumarrah had not finished his explana-
tion.
Natone too had started with surprise
at the revelation she had just heard,
but she remained silent also.
Then Eumarrah gave a rapid recital
of Younah’s story from the time of her
capture by the tribe, as well as of the
grievances which had prompted them
to such an act of revenge.
While the narration proceeded,
Youuah’s head drooped, and although
she listened attentively to all that
Eumarrah said, her eyes were never
lifted to his. When he had finished
his story he added, “You will under-
stand now, Younah, the reason of
Makooi’s hostility towards you, whom
all of the tribe save her only regard
with sentiments of love. She has never
forgotten nor forgiven your race for
the loss of my sister, who was her only
daughter. The appearance of the two
white men whom you and Natone saw
to-day within our hunting grounds has
revived her hatred, and it is no longer
in my power to protect you, should you
continue to dwell with the tribe.
Indeed, I may tell you that Makooi has


already advised the elders in council to
put you to death. It is to save you
from the doom that would be yours
that I ventured to bring you from the
gunyah to-night.” Then turning to
Natone, he addressed her saying, “You
have always loved each other, and I
know that to separate you would bring
sorrow to both, therefore I thought it
wise, Natone, that you should share
Youn&h’s flight, and be the companion
of her exile.”
“ What are you going to do with me
then, Eumarrah, since I know not my
own tribe, and cannot return to them,
and I dare not remain with yours ! ”
“ My plan is to conceal you and
Natone in a shelter among the rocks
to which I shall conduct you presently.
Makooi and the others will think you
have risen early and wandered forth
in quest of game or fruit, and they will
not know until evening that you are
not with the tribe. I shall return to
the encampment before the rest of the
tribe are astir, and none will know that
I have conducted your flight. And
since only those who were present at
the council when Makooi pronounced
your sentence are aware of the fate she
ordained for you, they cannot suspect
that you had any knowledge of it. It
shall be my aim to foster a belief that
you have both been captured by the
white men who were so close to us yes-
terday. The tribe will take alarm and
agree to the proposals 1 shall make
to abandon our grounds and seek
others far away ! ”
When Eumarrah ceased speaking
there was a tremor in his voice, and his
great black eyes were glistening with
unwonted moisture; then \ ouuAh
moved towards him and crouching at
his feet she rested her head upon his
arms which were clasped round his
knees, her long tawny hair falling
about her like a mantle.
“ Eumarrah ! ” she sobbed, “ are you
going to leave us here alone ; shall we
nave no one to protect us ? ” And
Natone joined in the protest, speak-
ing as rapidly as she could in the
surprise and alarm by which she was
agitated.
“Listen to me, children,” said the
savage, “ for some days, it may even be
for weeks,you must dwell together alone
in the cavity amongtherocksthatlshall
show you. You must subsist as you
can upon roots and berries, since you
can have no fire to cook any game that
you might capture. But when I have
succeeded in conducting the tribe to
other grounds, I shall steal away and
return to you. For I have sworn to
protect you, Youn&h, and to my father
and mother I swore when your life was
first threatened that if aught of harm
befel you, they should no longer have a
son. That hour has now arrived.
Natone, you will swear to be faith-
ful to YounMi 1 You will share her
solitude, comfort her and help her?”
he asked.
Natone placed her fingers upon the
mystic relic which hung from Eumar-
ran’s neck, and silently bowed her
head in assent.
“Then follow me once more,” and
the noble-hearted savage arose, and
pushing aside the interlacing boughs
upon the opposite side of the bower to
that wherein they had entered, he led
the way down the steep side of a rock-
bestrewn hill, at the foot of which rose
two pinnacle-shaped masses of basaltic
rock. Between these was a narrow
passage through which it was just
possible for one person at a time to
pass. Beyond this passage lay great,
fragments of rocks scattered about in
wild disorder, some of them being of
great size. Out of the general dis-
order which prevailed in this strange
spot, Nature had fashioned, as if
in contrast, to the confusion all
round, a sort of chamber, composed
of one great slab-like fragment of
rock, supported by three others of
almost uniform height,, which formed
the sides and back of the cavity.
Another large, irregular shaped mass
almost blocked up the only entrance to
the interior, but there was an almost
unnoticeable gap, towards which Eurnar
rah led the girls.
He beckoned to them to enter, and
then he followed them. The space
within was limited in size, being only
about ten or twelve feet square, but the
rocks which formed the floor of the
chamber were smooth and dry, and
there was more than sufficient room
for a moderately tall person to stand
erect within.


“ You will be safe enough in here,”
said Eumarrah, “ and it may only/be
for a day or two that you must keep
within. It is seldom that any of our
tribe descend’ to this rocky region, but
as they have been here, some of them
may return, but no one except myself
and Manalagaua know of this retreat,
I will take care to keep with him until
the tribe depart. Natone, I shall con-
trive to leave some embers smouldering
ere we break up our encampment,
from these you can easily kindle a
firestick when we have gone.”
“ But how shall we be sure that you
have really gone, and that it will be
safe for us to go back ? ” queried the
cautious Natone.
“ As we pass over the ridge of the hill
I will give you this note twice,” and
Eumarrah imitated the curious laughing
noise of that bird which frequents the
region—a sound which has earned for
it the not very attractive title of
“ laughing iackass.” By that you will
know thatwe aremovingaway intheon-
posite direction. Gather cautiously
what food you need, but tarry here
until I return to you. And now, if I
am to be in my accustomed place ere
break of day, I must retrace my steps.
Fear not, Younah, you have already
escaped so many perils, that only a
bright morrow must dawn for you yet.”
And not trusting himself to prolong his
adieu with the maiden who had en-
twined herself round every fibre of his
heart, Eumarrah sprang out of sight of
the two girls, who now feeling their
desolation, sank upon the rocky floor
of their cave and clasped in each other’s
arms yielded without restraint to the
grief which possessed them.
CHAPTER XV.
Oh ! when my friend and I
In some thick wood have wandered heedless
on
Hid from the vulgar eye. . . .
Oh 1 then the longest summer’s day
Seemed too, too much in haste.
BLAIR.
§ACK Ormond and his friend
of college days, Colin Dyer,
had left England behind
them in a spirit of adven-
turous longing for “some-
thing new under the sun ”
something new to them at
least, for they had used up all
the resources of travel and
exploration which Europe
could present to them at the period of
which I write, when the facilities for
moving from one country to another
were by no means so numerous or bo
convenient as they are in these Cook-
tourist days. The great invention of
steam was as yet in its infancy, and did
not extend to foreign countries, so that
a Continental tour was an event in the
lifetime of the few who were fortunate,
while a trip to the Antipodes was equi-
valent to a sentence of exile. For there
were no “ ocean greyhounds ” in those
remote days. A voyage of at least six
months might be anticipated if a ques-
tion of visiting Australasia arose ; and
the preparation of an outfit suitable for
spending a more prolonged period still
upon the high seas rendered the under-
taking a very serious matter for those
whom the force of circumstances almost
compelled to set out in quest of
Fortune’s smiles on these far distant
shores.
But Jack Ormond and his friend
were not impelled by such motives as
these, as fortune had smiled upon them
from the time at which they had com-
menced life’s journey.
They were the eldest sons and heirs
of wealthy Englishmen, whose large
estates in Sussex adjoined. Each had
passed through his university career
with honour, they had spent a con-
siderable time abroad when their educa-
tion was completed, had gone through
a London season together, and emerged
thence heart-whole.
While their plans for their next
movements were still undecided. Jack
Ormond’s brother-in-law, Colonel
Maude, received orders to proceed with
his regiment to Tasmania—or, as it was
then called, Van Diemen’s Land—


where a large penal settlement had
been established, to restore something
like order, and to establish the con-
fidence of assured protection in the
minds of the free settlers. These had
been f r eq uen tly harassed by attacks from
escapecf convicts, and military reinforce-
ments were found to be necessary.
Mrs. Maude was Jack’s only sister,
and he was passionately attached to her.
When the news of her husband’s des-
tination reached her at Summerlea,
where she had been spending thp
Christmas holidays with her parents,
the greatest dismay prevailed in the
family circle. Mr. and Mrs. Ormond
begged that she would not think of
accompanying her husband to so bar-
barous and remote a region.
But Dorothy Maude was not a wife
who could be persuaded to remain at
home in comfort and security while
dutv compelled her husband to go
forth and meet discomfort, difficulties,
and, it might be, danger. So she quietly
•and firmly replied to all the entreaties
and objections of her parents by saying,
“ Wherever Lionel goes I shall accom-
pany him, when it is possible for roe to
do so. My place is by his side. What
happiness could there be for either of
us were 1 to shirk my duty as soon as
any prospect of unpleasantness arose ! ”
Jack was also distressed at the idea
of his sister’s banishment from England,
but he took her view of the matter, and
agreed that it was the right thing for
her to do —to accompany her husband.
Then a brilliant idea occurred to him.
Why should not he also go and visit
this distant land? The thought, once
entertained, grew hourly until at last it
developed into a resolution.
Then he hastened to his friend and
almost inseparable companion, Colin
Dyer, and proposed that he also should
undertake the voyage. “ You see, old
fellow, there is not much European
ground that we have left untrodden.
We have explored a goodly part of Asia,
been to Egypt, and would have been
certain to make for America next.
We can go there some other time ; this
order of Maude’s to the Antipodes is
just the very thing for us.”
“ All right, Jack. For my part lam
content to go anywhere with you, and
this will virtually mean to the ‘ con-
fines of the earth,’ provided, of course,
that the governor consents.” And the
two young men grasped each other's
hands warmly, as if to seal the agree-
ment.
Colin’s “ governor ” did consent, for
he held the opinion that it was wise
to allow young men plenty of liberty
before they settled down to the grave
responsibilities of life. When Colin’s
wanderings were over, he would, re-
flected his father, settle down to the
life of a country gentleman, become
interested in the welfare of his future
tenantry and local affairs generally,
while if he preferred something more
exciting there was always a seat in
Parliament available for him.
The Maudes were delighted at the
prospect of having Jack’s society and
that of his friend during the voyage
and early settlement in their new home,
and although many lingering farewells
had to be taken by them from old
friends and associations, it was a cheer-
ful, hopeful party that were grouped
upon tne deck of the Ocean Queen
as the last dim line of blue in the
distance faded from sight with the
dying day, and they knew they had
seen the last of dear old England for
some years.
The Ocean Queen made a favourable
voyage, for in less than five months
from the time of her departure from
Plymouth she was safely anchored in
the blue waters of the Derwent.
A few days later and the Maudes
were established in the quarters that
would be their home now, at the
“ Barracks,” and here, too, Jack and
Colin took up their residence.
Notwithstanding the fact that all
comforts and even luxuries procurable
at that period were to be found in the
Colonel’s dwelling, Dorothy missed so
many of the refinements to which she
had been accustomed in her well-ap-
pointed home in England that she
often wondered whether she could
really reconcile herself to so long a
period of exile as her husband’s instruc-
tions led him to expect. Not the least
among the inconveniences to be ex-
perienced in those days was the defec-
tive service to be obtained from the
only domestics available at that early
period of colonial history. True, Mrs.


Maude had taken her own maid with
her when she left England, and the
Colonel was able to command the
personal attendance of a very capable
private soldier, but all other servants
were recruited from the ranks of con-
victs, whose term of sentence permitted
what should have been regarded as
an indulgence. But too often the
comparative liberty which domestic
service allowed them was abused by
their insolence and disobedience. But
in time Mrs. Maude grew accustomed
to such petty annoyances as these, and
began to enjoy the change. The magni-
ficent scenery which has since then
caused the capital to be regarded as
one of the most beautiful spots in
Australasia presented new features to
her artistic sense every time she walked,
or rode, accompanied sometimes by her
husband, but more often by Jack and
Colin. For the Colonel’s duties did not
always permit him to join in the excur-
sions of which they were so fond, and
which were all the more enjoyable
because of the delightful climate, whose
praises they never wearied of sound-
ing.
“ Ah ! this is something like spring
weather," said Jack one morning in
September, as he threw himself upon a
bank thickly covered with ferns, and
looked up through the boughs_ of a
giant silver wattle tree, then in full
bloom, at the almost cloudless blue sky
above. And as he spoke he drew in
with deep sighs of content the delicious
fragrance with which the air was laden,
a fragrance without rival among all the
subtle and delicate perfumes of Nature.
In it seem combined all the rare odours
of rose, violet, and lily, with a some-
thing of its own beside ; and in no
other clime but its own is this rare
perfume ever attained. You may find
the ones in other lands where they
have been acclimatised, but although
you recognise its graceful, delicate
foliage, and its golden-coloured blossom,
you will miss this, its greatest charm.
No wonder, then, that Jack revelled
in the delicious scent which filled all
the air around him, nor that he moved
reluctantly at last from the spot where
first he made aquaintance with the
wattles. But other wonders claimed
his and Colin’s admiration, as they
made longer excursions, in which they
were not accompanied by Mrs. Maude.
Many stirring tales they heard in
their wanderings as they claimed with-
out hesitation the hospitality of the
settlers within whose demesnes they
happened to find themselves at the
close of a long day’s walk, when it was
too late, or they were too weary to
return to Hobart Town. And as freely
as they claimed it was the hospitality
extended to them, for welcome beyond
words was the advent of any one from
the city to those who lived at a distance
from it. Thus did the pioneers of the
colony glean a tardy intelligence
of what was going on in the world ;
thus only could they learn tidings of a
change of dynasty in one nation—the
conquest of another, or it might be of a
new succession to the throne of England
itself.
Jack Ormond and his friend Colin
were returning from one of their ex-
cursions in the neighbourhood of Mount
Nelson one afternoon, and both were
tired and thirsty, for the day had been
unusually warm, when they happened
to glance across a meadow, beyond
which they discerned an orchard
wherein were cherry trees laden with
ripe, juicy-looking fruit. Colin pointed
to the orchard as he exclaimed,
“ There’s a glimpse of home, Jack. Let
us go and ask permission to satisfy our
thirst with a few handfuls of those
tempting cherries." And he took oft
his hat to wipe the moisture from his
forehead.
“Not the least objection, 1 assure
you, old boy. So here goes,” and he
quickly vaulted across the post and
rail fence which separated the meadow
from the track which ran beside it. A
walk of five minutes more brought
them to a small wicket gate which
opened into the orchard. They entered
and walked towards the low verandahed
villa which stood embowered amid trees
before them. But ere they reached it,
an elderly gentleman came from within
the open door, and advanced towards
them and looked at them enquiringly.
Jack, without hesitation, emboldened
by years of travel, made known the
object of their visit, giving at the same
time his card, while Colin also produced
his.


The gentleman smiled as he read the
names, and said “Ah ! you are friends
of Colonel Maude’s, I believe 1 1 have
heard of you, and am pleased to wel-
come you to Kyenrope. My name is
Edward Manning. Come inside, Mrs.
Manning will be pleased to make
your acquaintance.”
Nothing loth, the young men fol-
lowed him into the shady drawing-room,
and being very tired as well as heated
by their long ramble, they sank with
an air of content into two inviting
lounges placed beneath the open win-
djws.
Very soon their host returned with
his wife, to whom he presented them,
and before her welcome had been half
spoken a servant entered bearing a
tray upon which was daintily arranged
a tempting collation of the ripe cherries
which had enticed them hither, as well
as some luscious strawberries, a crystal
ewer of thick cream, sugar, and a large
jug of milk. When the friends had
done ample justice to this welcome
repast, their host and his wife entered
into general conversation with them,
eliciting information about places ana
events which had mutual interest, and
giving on their part much information
about their adopted country.
The Mannings discovered that their
visitors were acquainted with several
people whom they also knew, and then
enquired whether either of them had
met their old friends, the St. Hills.
Mrs. Manning’s face grew a little sad
in its expression as her husband made
this query, and as a negative reply was
given, she sighed gently as she said
“Ah ! poor Ida ! her recollections of the
colony are not very agreeable.”
“Why?” enquired Jack. “Is there
any reason why they should not be ? ”
“ Yes,” said Mrs. Manning. “I will
tell you their story,” which she did as
briefly as possible, and then added,
“ Mrs. St. Hill has never forgotten the
child whose loss has seemed _to be
involved in mystery, and often in her
letters she speaks of Keitha as if she
had an unaccountable feeling that she
still lives.”
“ Her husband, though, Mr. St. Hill,
does he share this feeling with his
wife ? ” asked Colin, who seemed inter-
ested in the story.
“ No; bat he does not discourage
such an idea, for he believes that it is
only a harmless hallucination, and that
it has kept her from sinking into abject
despair. He himself always was of
opinion that the child perished in the
flames at Karoola, but many of his
friends here were puzzled to account
for the fact that no semblance of her
remains could be discovered among the
debris of the fire, although the most
careful search was instituted.”
“ What alternative theory could there
be, then, to account for her disappear-
ance ? ” asked Jack.
“ Well,” answered Mr. Manning, “ you
understand the child had already
wandered away from her mother’s side
before the latter noticed the flames,
and it is just possible that she might
have gone beyond the limits of the
garden into the bush, where she could
in those days have easily been lost by
becoming hidden in the almost im-
penetrable scrub ; or another, but, I
confess, very remote possibility is, that
she might have been stolen by the
blacks, who were at one time in open
hostility with her parents.”
Jack now became more interested, and
questioned Mr. Manning again, “Had
tne child any trinkets or anything
which would have excited the cupidity
of the natives, or of bushrangers, for I
suppose these latter were sometimes to
be encountered even then?”
“ She was wearing a curious coral
necklace with an antique gold clasp,
richly chased. This had* been once her
mother’s favourite ornament, and was
a family heirloom. It was minutely
described in proclamations which were
issued at the time, and made as public
as possible, announcing a reward far
above its intrinsic value, but no result
ever followed this publication.”
“ Well,” said Jack, speaking slowly,
and thoughtfully, “if the child had
perished in the flames, the necklace
must surely have been discovered,
because the gold clasp could not have
been consumed.”
“ That is an argument I have often
advanced, just as you are doing. But,
on the other hand, if some unscrupulous
man among the shearers, who were
assisting at the time df the fire, found
it, he might have concealed it until an


opportunity came for disposing of it,
and thus have removed the only
evidence of the child’s real fate.”
“ Well there seems little chance that
the mystery will be unravelled after all
this time—twelve years ago I think you
said 1 ” asked Jack.
Mrs. Manning assented, and a few
moments later her guests were making
their adieux, warmly thanking her for
the hospitality so warmly extended.
A few weeks later, and the friends
accepted an invitation to join a party
travelling northwards to the opposite
extremity of the island, and so, fully
equipped with all shooting and fishing
appliances in case any opportunities for
sport should arise, they took leave of
the Maudes for a time, and set out in
quest of new adventure.
CHAPTER XVI.
Suddenly stood at my bead a dream,
Whose inward apparition greatly moved
my fancy.
Mtt mnw
MILTON.
YOUNAH and Natone, worn out by
fatigue, loss of their wonted sleep,
excitement and fear, had, when
their first wild burst of grief was
spent, slept long and soundly. The sun
was already past its meridian when at
last they awoke, and wondered for a
while vaguely where they were.
But the strange events of the
previous night, and Eumarrah’s urgent
caution, soon flashed back to their
bewildered minds, and during the
whole day they did not pass beyond
their strange dwelling. Hunger and
thirst assailed them,but they dared not
venture forth in quest of roots or berries,
nor even to the splashing water which
gurgled and lapped the rocks so close
to their shelter. They were not unused
to long fasts in seasons when food was
difficult to obtain by reason of incle-
ment weather,and now that they knew
their safety depended upon their cau-
tious obedience to Euraarrah’s counsels,
they accepted the situation without
complaining.
A small ray of comfort came during
that day of loneliness and suspense to
Younah when she found that her
little white kangaroo had scented
and followed her, but the same
event caused a feeling of alarm to
Natone, for she dreaded lest any of
the tribe should have noticed the little
creature, and watched it to their hiding
Elace. Younah took her little pet within
er arms, and lavished many endear-
ments upon it, for she was touched by
its attachment to her in thus tracking
her.
This day passed safely enough, and
no intrusion of Younah’s enemies oc-
curred.
The situation in which the maidens,
so strangely associated, and so dis-
similar in every respect, found them-
selves might have seemed more serious
to them both, but Younah’s mind was
filled with thoughts and conjectures
concerning the strange revelation
Eumarrah had made to them after their
flight from the tribe.
“ Nat one,” said Younah, “do you
know I did not feel at all afraid of
those strange men we saw yester-
day. I should have waited for them to
come quite close if you had not been so
frightened and hurried me into the
scrub.”
“Oh, Younah,” exclaimed her com-
panion, “ I am sure you seemed over-
come with fear. I could scarce get you
to move from our hiding-place and
return to the camp.”
“ Yes, but that was because I could
not understand why I felt so strangely
at the sight of these men. I saw they
were of my own colour, and they wore
something strange, not skins or furs.
Astrange dream seemed to come overme
that I had seen some others like them,
and had even heard such words as they
were speaking, although I understood
them not. And I could not get rid of
that feeling until I actually fell asleep,
and was dreaming it all over again.
Then Eumarrah came and aroused me.
Now, Natone, do you not think these
strangers must be of the tribe from
which I was stolen ? ”


“ I know not what to think,Younah,”
Natone said, “for, as you know, I
have always thought you were one of
us. But I might have guessed that
your fair skin and sunny hair could not
have come of our blood. Now that I
have learnt the truth, it seems strange
that 1 did not suspect it long ago. Did
you not ? ”
“Indeed, yes. But Eumarrahbrought
me this little creature one day to con-
vince me that Nature occasionally made
mistakes, and that it was quite possible
for me to be of the same blood as your
tribe. He only did so to stay my
questions.”
“ I can see now! ” Until night
fell around them did they discuss
the strange things which had so lately
befallen them, and then when the songs
of the birds were hushed, and no sound
broke the stillness of the sequestered
valley save the ever murmuring stream
as it hurried over masses of rock,
Younah and Natone ceased to speak,
and, crouching closely together in the
warmest corner of their refuge, slept at
last.
The next morning they were awake
at the usual hour, and, being keenly
assailed by the pangs of hunger,
ventured to the entrance of the cave,
hoping to hear Eumarrah’s signal that
all was safe. But no such reassuring
sound broke the silence of the morning,
and, disappointed, they drew back.
Towards mid-day, Natone once more
approached the opening, and had just
called Younah to her, saying joyously,
“ There it is now, Younah. They have
left these grounds. Come, let us seek
for food,” when another sound fell upon
their ears.
It was the barking of a dog, and as
neither of them had heard such a sound
before, they were terrified, and stood
still, looking at each other in dismay.
Nearer, and nearer it came. Surely
this dread creature was coming towards
their shelter. And ere they had well
realised this new danger, the possessor
of that deep, baying voice, was upon
them. It rushed inside the cave and
went straight towards Younfth's pet,
the little kangaroo. This it seized, and
holding it fast between its cruel jaws,
quickly crashed all life and movement
from its delicate frame.
Younah made a despairing rush to
save her pet, hut the dog growled
ominously, and as its eyes gleamed
fiercely she dared not advance any
further. But as soon as she saw the
kangaroo lying dead before her, mangled
almost beyond recognition, she uttered
several screams of grief and horror, in
which Natone joined, fearing that a
similar fate was about to overtake them.
“Ha ! what have we here ? Vixen
has found a quarry surely,” exclaimed
Jack Ormond, as he and Colin stood
outside the cave, wondering for a few
seconds what had become of the dog.
Presently they saw it come from the
interior of the rook-formed recess,
and guided thus, they resolved to enter,
and see what game the dog had started.
For a little while their eyes,
accustomed to the strong light _of
noontide, could scarce see anything
within the chamber, and Colin had
already drawn out his tinder box to illu-
minate the recess, when Younah, her
sobs stifled by surprise at this second in-
vasion of their quarters, recognising
the strangers of a few days age, came
forward, exclaiming “Do not kill us ! I
am of your tribe! ”
Her words were of course unintelli-
fible to the Englishmen, who were pro-
ably more startled to find the cave
tenanted by human beings than the
latter were at their intrusion.
Neither of them had yet come into
direct contact with aborigines in their
uncivilised, primitive state, although
they were not unacquainted with their
general characteristics. But here
seemed a curious phenomenon. For
one of these natives was as black as any
they had seen or heard of, while the
other was as white and as European in the
cast of her features as themselves.
And their eyes, becoming accustomed
to the gloom of the cave, saw that
while one of the girls wore only Nature’s
garb, the other was, though scantily,
yet modestly clad.
Younflh’s appealing words, although
they conveyed no meaning to the
young men, yet had something in their
tone which made them understand that
she needed help.
Jack approached her, and offered hia
hand with an air which was intended
to inspire confidence.


And YounHh seemed to understand
as much, for she came closer to him,
and touched his hand. Then she
pointed to his face, and afterwards
touched her own, as if to draw his
attention to the fact that she was of
his colour.
The action was more eloouent than
words, and Jack comprehended it in an
instant.
“ There is some mystery here, Colin,”
he said. “ I believe we have met with
a real adventure this time. But we
must try and induce these Woodland
nymphs to venture beyond this retreat,
so that we may inspect them more
closely.”
He took Younah gently by the hand,
CHAPTER XVII.
And pass before my darken'd sight
Thy hand which lets in charm’d light,
And teach my soul, and let me see
The ways of God, fair dame in thee!
CUNNINGHAM.
*i e3OTH Jack and Colin were speech-
less with amazement as they
stood before the twogirlswhom they had
discovered in their rock-formed retreat.
YounHh, as she looked up at her new
captors with an expression of appeal-
ing confidence rather than of fear,
presented a spectacle that neither of
them would easily forget. Her long,
bright hair fell in wavy masses far
below her waist, covering her shoulders
and bosom as a mantle. The tunic of
plaited rushes which had always been
the principal feature of her costume
reached to her knees, and her feet were
encased in mocassin-like coverings of
skin bound to her ankles by cords of
fibre. Round her throat she still wore
the coral necklace that none had pre-
sumed to take from her, and which was
all that remained to her of her Karoola
days. The natural fairness of her skin
had deepened into an almost brunette-
like tint, by reason of continued ex-
posure in the open air, and seemed to
harmonise more with the colour of her
deep, hazel-brown eyes than did her
still golden-hued tresses.
Beside her cowered the trembling
Natone, who was in momentary fear
and led her beyond the cave, beckoning
to Natone to follow them.
Younfth went willingly enough, for
now that she knew her life was en-
dangered if any of the Fialumma tribe
encountered her, she felt that the pro-
tection of another tribe, and one to
which she believed herself to be allied,
was of all things the most to be desired.
Natone followed slowly and re-
luctantly, for she had heard strange
stories among her own people of the
cruelty of white men, and she fully
believed that these would kill her. But
she determined that whatever fate
might, await her she would not abandon
Youiuih, she would keep with her,
through good or evil.
lest these strangers, of a tribe she had
never looked upon, should club her and
her companion. For to her the mus-
kets borne by them seemed to be carried
for no other purpose than that to which
the waddies of her own people were
usually applied.
Jack first broke the silence with
which he and his friend had for some
time regarded their strange discovery.
What can these girls be doing here
alone, Colin ? And what are we going
to do with them 1 ” he queried with a
preplexed air.
“Take them to the settlement, I
should say. We cannot leave them
here. One of them is certainly of
European blood. But where are her
parents; they may be about this
vicinity somewhere ? ” suggested Colin.
“ I think not,” Jack said. “If she
had parents in this wilderness they
could be none other than runaway con-
victs. This girl belongs to a better
type of race than is generally found
among that class. I am of opinion
that she has been lost, or it may be that
she was stolen from her home by some
of the tribes. But you are right, Colin,
we had better take them to the settle-
ment. Our fair young friend almost
seems anxious for us not to leave her,
and the other will probably not object
to follow her companion.”
Jack whistled for Vixen who was run-
ning about among the bushes and under l


growth some little distance away, her
appetite for sport having been whetted
by the blood she had already drawn—
the blood of YounAh’s hapless white
kangaroo. The dog came bounding up
at her master’s call, but the sight of
the destroyer of her pet once more
aroused YounAh’s grief, and she began
to weep anew.
But Jack, although he knew not the
reason of the girl’s present emotion,
attributing it to fear of the dog, took
some trouble to assure her that it would
not harm her, and at her command
Yixen crouched submissively before
her, wagging her tail, and looking from
Jack to YounAh, and back again, as if
to say, “ I understand, we are to be
friends.”
A strange procession the four made
as they moved silently at first over the
rough masses of rocks that lay between
the cave and the newly founded white
settlement from those who had so often
dwelt beside the basin of the Weena.
The elders of the Pialumma tribe
had, it is true, known ever since their
last arrival at their summer hunting
grounds that the dwellings of their
enemies were being erected at no
great distance from them, and this
occasioned the extraordinary vigilance
which they had observed ever since
they had discerned the first column of
tell-tale smoke.
But neither YounAh nor Nat one
knew aught of this, and while they
followed, or rather accompanied, the
two Englishmen without question,
they had no idea as to their desti-
nation.
“ Colin,” spoke Jack, after they had
climbed to the top of the eminence
known in more modern days as The
Cataract Hill, where they were fain to
pause awhile to recover breath, for they
were laden with guns and other
impedimenta, “ I have been thinking
that we may as well take these two
young ladies first of all to Mrs. Har-
f reaves. She will be able tosuggest what
ad better be done with them ulti-
mately, And, if I am not mistaken,
as she knows a little of the strange
language of the natives, or of some of
the tribes, perhaps she may be able to
extract some information from them.
It will be too late to-night to go
further than the captain’s quarters,
besides.”
“ Yes,” assented his friend, “ I am
quite of your opinion ; we shall be
hungry and tired enough I fancy by
the time we get to The Lodge. But,
I say, old fellow, what a surprise it will
be for them all when they see what
manner of game we have brought back
with us ! ”
The afternoon was well advanced
ere the strange party descended into
the sheltered valley within which the
small settlement of white men had
been but recently established, and
which was protected by a small detach-
ment of military, under the command
of Captain Hargreaves, who had been
despatched from Hobart Town to un-
dertake this duty.
The Hargreaves were intimate friends
of Colonel and Mrs. Maude, and at the
time of their removal from Hobart Town
to the new settlement of Launceston
they had extended a pressing invita-
tion to Jack and Colin to visit them
there, and to join in what adventures
might arise. For in those primitive
days, when the early colonists were
never very secure against attacks from
bushrangers, or from the blacks, the
possibility of exciting adventures was
always present.
But even the Hargreaves,experienced
as they had become with strange oc-
currences, were considerably startled
at seeing the strange pair that Jack
and Colin were escorting when warned
of their approach by the barking
of the house dogs, and the Captain and
his wife hastened out to the verandah
which surrounded the low, wooden,
bungalow inhabited by them, in order
to welcome their guests.
Jack explained as briefly as possible
in a few rapid sentences all that there
was to tell, and begged that Mrs. Har-
greaves would afiord his
shelter for the night, while they dis-
cussed their future destination.
But before they could do much more
than exchange exclamations of as-
tonishment, the quartette were at
their porch.
Jack had taken YounAh by the hand
in order to reassure her, for the girl
had become alarmed by the loud bark-
ing of the dogs which heralded their


approach. Natone, divested of all her
wonted sprightliness,followed as though
conscious that the life and liberty of
yore would thenceforward be sacrificed,
and Colin, with Vixen at his heels,
brought up the rear.
Mrs. Hargreaves at once approached
the girls, and taking each by the hand,
she led them within her own com-
fortable, though small, morning room,
just inside the verandah. First of all
she ordered some food to be set before
them, for she saw that the strangely
assorted companions were evidently in
need of refreshment. They had not
indeed tasted food since Eumarrah
had left them, not daring to venture
in quest of anything they could eat.
Youn&h looked longingly at some
dainty cakes and milk which a servant
brought in and placed before her
mistress, but the confections were not
such as she had been accustomed to,
and although she and Natone were in-
vited by signs to come and partake,they
stood hesitating to do so.
Airs. Hargreaves, guessing that their
daily fare had been of a widely different
nature, took one of the cakes, and
breaking it in halves, handed a piece to
each of her visitors. Then she took a
small piece of one herself and began to
eat it, thus inviting them to follow
her example.
Hunger overcame the reluctance of
the girls, and they tasted the cake
with some eagerness. Finding its
flavour pleasant, they advanced to the
table, and helped themselves to further
supplies. But when Mrs. Hargreaves
poured some milk into glasses for them
they could not be made to understand
without difficulty that they were to
drink from those curious vessels.
How to dispose of these unexpected
guests for the night was the question
that next caused Mrs. Hargraves
some uneasiness, for she quickly con-
cluded from the manner in which they
had partaken of the first meal, that the
beds of civilisation were unknown to
them.
But she solved this difficulty also by
conducting the girls to an outhouse, in
which she directed that some piles of
long freshly cut grass should be placed
for their accommodation, and then
having provided them with a few rugs,
she left them to seek the rest they
seemed to require. But she took the
precaution to secure the outer fasten-
ings of the door, lest they might en-
deavour to escape in the early hours of
the morning.
CHAPTER XVIII.
A native grace
Sat fair-proportioned on her polished
limbs
Veil’d in a simple robe, their best attire
Beyond the pomp of dress.
THOMSON.
JACK and Colin spent the evening
in relating the story of their
strange discovery to the Har-
greaves, and in speculating with
them as to the manner in which the
white girl had come to be associated
with her sable companion.
When Mrs. Hargreaves described the
rude way in which they had devoured
their food, and their inability to under-
stand any words of the native dialect
in which she addressed them, they
concurred in the opinion that Youna.ii
must have passed many years apart
from civilisation.
“ I remarked,” said Mrs. Hargreaves,
“ that while the aborigine wears only
such ornaments as I have ever seen
upon the women of her race—rows of
small shells strung upon sinews of
some animal—the white girl has a far
more elaborate necklace. This appears
to be of coral, curiously twisted and
cut in such a manner that the natives
could certainly not do, since they have
no tools wherewith to perform such
work.”
Jack Ormond leaned forward as Mrs.
Hargreaves made this statement, and
exclaimed as she concluded, “ A coral
necklace, you say ? Oh ! did you notice
whether it was fastened by a gold
clasp ?”
“No, fori only took in the details of


the girl’s costume casually, and re-
marked the necklace because it differs
from the native ornaments. Besides
only an inch or two of it was visible at
her throat, her long, thick hair quite
concealed the rest. But you seem
strangely interested. Have you any
reason to be curious about this neck
lace ? ”
“Yes,” Jack answered, “if it should
prove to be the one described to me
not very long ago, for in that case it
will form a very valuable clue to the
identity of the girl we have found.
I wish you would manage in some
way to ascertain if this' necklace
has an antique rather, curious clasp of
gold.”
“ I shall certainly try to do so at our
next interview, for now that your
interest is so thoroughly aroused I can
foresee that you will not be satisfied
until your doubts are set at rest. But,
meantime, vou may as well relate to us
the story of the necklace you suppose
this one to be,” suggested Mrs. Har-
graves.
Whereupon Jack narrated the his-
tory of the St. Hills’ misfortunes, as
he had heard them from Mr. Man-
ning. And soon afterwards the party
broke up, Jack and Colin being glad
to retire after their fatigue and adven-
ture.
Early next morning Mrs. Hargreaves
visited the girls to see how they had
fared during the night. Judging from
their appearance she concluded that
neither of them had slept _ very well ;
but the novelty of their situation
sufficiently accounted for that.
She desired her guests to follow her,
encouraging them by smiles and
gestures to put aside all fear. Youn&h
indeed, betrayed none, and seemed
anxious to reassure Natone that they
were with a friendly tribe.
Mrs. Hargreaves conducted them to
her own dressing-room, where she had
already laid out several garments such
as she thought would improve the ap-
pearance of the girls, and render them
more presentable.
With little difficulty she contrived to
make them understand that she
wished them to don the clothing at
which they gazed with some astonish-
ment. She pointed to her own gown,
and then to the garments she was
showing them. At last she made an
effort to put one —a dark blue cotton
frock—upon Youn&h. It belonged to
Mrs. Hargreaves’ maid, who was rather
a_ diminutive person, about Younah’s
size, for the gown fitted her very
tolerably.
Mrs Hargreaves was surprised at the
readiness with which YounMi consented
to assume the garb of civilisation, and
no sooner was she arrayed in the gown
than her hostess essayed to dispose of
her super-abundant tresses. She
swept them back from the girl’s face
and bosom, gathered them back from
her shoulders, and with a few quick
movements had woven the greater part
into a long thick plait, and then as she
stooped to knot a ribbon about the end
of the plait, she saw that the necklace
Younmi was wearing was indeed
fastened by the curiously shaped
massive clasp that Jack Ormond had
described. This was indeed a dis-
covery, and Mrs. Hargreaves trembled
so much with excitement that she
could scarcely devote the necessary
attention to Natone, whom she also
insisted should assume some kind of
costume.
Among her belongings, Mrs. Har-
greaves had found a quantity of bright
scarlet cotton twill, and this she had
ingeniously fashioned into a garment
for the native girl. She draped it artis-
tically about her dusky form, merely
securing it by a stitch here and there
to keep the folds in place, and so
pleased was she with the result that
she led both girls to the mirror in
her own apartment adjoining, so that
they might see for themselves what a
transformation she had effected.
Then she drew aside to mark the
effect. Younilh stood quietly viewing
her own reflection, which for a brief
space she did not realise was her own
image, but when she saw Natone who
was standing beside her begin to dance
about and gesticulate, repeating all
these movements through her double
in the mirror, she became also a little
excited. For although the girls had
seen themselves mirrored in many a
placid stream, neither of them had been
attired as they were now, so that this
was a very novel experience to them,


and for the nonce Natone forgot to be
afraid.
As soon as the girls had grown
accustomed to the sight of themselves
reflected, Mrs. Hargreaves, who had
been silently enjoying the scene, called
her maid. “ Jean,” she said, “ you will
now conduct these visitors to the north
end of the verandah, and ask Dinah
to send them some breakfast there. I
may as well tell you that one of them
is, in all probability, a young lady who
has influential friends, and it is im-
perative that she be treated with con-
sideration. And,for her sake, her com-
panion must also receive hospitality
and kindness. I trust to you, Jean, to
see that nothing like impertinent
curiosity from any of the servants be
tolerated. Their habits are not civilised,
but it will be easier to teach them to
acquire all that is necessary by kind-
ness and patience than by ridicule.”
Jean assured her mistress that her
instructions should be faithfully carried
out, and that she herself would take
care that the strangers should not be
subjected to any annoyance.
Younah and Natone thus disposed of,
Mrs. Hargreaves hastened to the dining-
room, where breakfast had just been
announced.
She was eager to impart to Jack the
pleasing discovery she had made, but
she wisely decided to defer her news
until the meal was over, for she knew
that her husband objected to any kind
of excitement during the discussion of
the morning meal. At that time he
liked to glance over the pages of the
latest paper (sometimes more than a
month old) look through the Gazette or
anything else that could be made
to do duty for a daily journal, and sip
his coffee in a leisurely fashion.
While he did this, he had no objection
to any desultory conversation going on
among others who might be present,
and he not infrequently interjected an
occasional remark himself.
When at last breakfast was at an
end Mrs. Hargreaves said,“ I want you
to come out to the verandah im-
mediately, Mr. Ormond, and you too,
Mr. Dyer. I have to present you to
some one,” and with an air of mystery,
but a mischievous gleam in her eyes,
she led the way from the room.
You nib and Natone had finished
their repast, and stepped from the
verandah on to the cool greensward
beneath, and here the former was
standing looking curiously about her
at many objects strange to her, while
Natone squatted in native fashion on
the grass beside her.
“ What do you say to your prot£g6s
now ? ” enquired Mrs. Hargreaves, who
saw with some enjoyment the look of
amazement that filled the eyes of the
young Englishmen.
“ You must have a fairy wand,” Colin
said. “ But pray keep quiet for a while,
Jack ; such a scene once disturbed we
may not see again. They are not
conscious that we are near them yet."
And the trio remained almost motion-
less as they watched the living picture
before them.
YounMi’s tall, slim figure looked
almost womanly in the gown she now
wore, and the new adjustment of her
hair had given so different an expres-
sion to her face that Jack almost
doubted whether this was the girl they
had brought from the cave but yester-
day. For then her forehead and brows
were scarcely discernible for the long,
unconfined locks which straggled over
them and on either cheek. Now they
could see that her features were regular
and well-formed, her brows delicately
marked and straight, her dark hazel
brown eyes large and expressive.
From Youn&h, the young men
glanced to the dark figure resting beside
net. The dark ebon-like limbs of Natone
contrasted strongly with the bright
folds which enveloped her, and towards
which she ever and anon glanced with
an air of great satisfaction.
The exterior of the house with its
many windows, and doors, the exotic
plants which were already flourishing
in the newly-laid out garden, were
objects of interest to both girls, who
had left the boarded verandah to walk
by preference on the grass to which
they were accustomed. For Natone was
still barefooted, and Younfih retained
her mocassins.
So interested were they in gazing
about them that the trio who watched
were able to take in all the details of
the remarkable picture they made for-
some time.


At last Mrs. Hargreaves, touching
Jack on the arm, and pointing to
Younih, said, “ She wears the very
necklace you were describing last night,
Mr. Ormond ; let us advance towards
them now, you may have an op-
portunity to see for yourself.”
“ Then you have seen the clasp, Mrs.
Hargreaves 1” he exclaimed.
“ Yes, when I arranged her hair this
morning I satisfied myself beyond
doubt. There are not likely to be two
such uncommon necklaces in the Anti-
podes.”
And then they advanced towards the
pair on the miniature lawn beneath.
The quick ears of the girls,trained to
catch the slightest sound, detected their
approach, and in an instant the picture
they had made so unconsciously was
changed.
Natone sprang to her feet, and stood
beside YouniUi, while the latter looked
anxiously to see what newcomer was
approaching them.
But her face brightened when she
recognised the men who had delivered
her from the peril in which she knew
herself to be but yesterday.
And when Jack, who advanced
towards her first, took her by the hand,
saying mechanically “ Good morning,”
she looked up at him with a happy
smile of confidence, and feeling that she
ought to say something in reply to his
greeting, she uttered the words “ Mena
loyeta nena” (I love you.)
Of course the sentence was meaning-
less to Jack, nor did Mrs. Hargreaves
understand it, for the various tribes
spoke different dialects, and could not
often understand those who came from
localities far removed from their own
haunts.
So Ybunah’s pretty speech fell upon
unheeding ears.
Jack was naturally impatient _ to
obtain a view of the necklace to which
so much interest attached, but he was
uncertain how to effect his purpose.
At last he hit upon the expedient of
exhibiting to the girls his watch with
the gold chain and trinkets attached.
He knew this would rivet their atten-
tion, and as he opened the case, and
pointed to the works within, then in-
vited them to listen to the noise of the
ticking, he was interested himself at the
effect produced upon them. At last he
allowed Youn&h to take the watch and
its appendages into her own hands, and
as she intently examined it, he began
to take a little notice of her. And he
wondered then that he had not re-
marked before that she had a very
attractive face. When she had ex-
amined and turned the watch over as
much as she desired, Jack pointed to
her necklace, and made signs that she
should allow him to see it. Youn4h
understood him, and without hesitation
she unclasped it and placed it in his
hands.
He saw,as quickly as Mrs. Hargreaves
had done, that this was unquestionably
the one that Mr. Manning had des-
cribed, or its exact counterpart. And,
like her, he did not think it was pro-
bable that two such uncommon orna-
ments would have found their way to
these distant shores.
The strangely cut coral pieces were
there twisted and twined about, and
the massive antique clasp with its
rarely chased design, although dull
and somewhat worn, was unmistak-
able.
Having satisfied himself by a close
scrutiny of the trinket, Jack returned
it to its owner with a courteous bow of
thanks.
Then he thought he would like to
ascertain by what name she was called.
He pointed to himself and said “ Jack,”
then pointing to her he raised his eye-
brows enquiringly. Younflh understood
him, for she pronounced her own name
which he repeated after her. Then
again he indicated Natone, and learned,
her name also.


CHAPTER XIX
Ere the earl> settlers came and stocked
These wilds with sheep and kiue, the grasses
grew.
So that they took the passing pilgrim in
And whelmed him.
KENDAL
tTACK ORMOND now entertained
Jl no doubts that be had found the
Cl/ daughter of Keith St. Hill, the
child whose fate had been enveloped
in mystery for twelve years.
He therefore lost no time in writing
full particulars of his adventure to Mr.
Manning, of Kyenrope, for he was the
nearest friend the St. Hills had in the
colony. During the interval—a long one
in those early days—which must elapse
before Mr. Manning’s reply could reach
him, he occupied a good deal of his time
in teaching his some of the
usages of civilisation. At least he gave
such instruction to YounHh and, as she
acquired knowledge, Natone was quick
to imitate her companion.
The first difficulty to be encountered
was to reconcile thesechildren of Nature
to the constraint of dwelling in a house,
and giving up their habits of roaming
at will in the bush. But as Mrs. Har-
f reaves, who had volunteered to extend
er protection to the girls, pending
other arrangements, made allowances
for this love of freedom, and proposed
that within the limits of the garden and
grounds they might roam _ at will, they
spent most of their time in the fresh
air and sunshine. Natone felt the re-
straint more than Youn&h did, forin her
veins ran the blood of a wild, free race
who knew nothing of the narrow
bounds within which the children of
civilisation must dwell ; and if her
attachment and devotion to Younah
had been less she would have en-
deavoured to regain her freedom, and
seek again the pleasures, if also the
perils, of her forest life. And, further-
more, she had plighted her word to
Eumarrah that she would not abandon
Youn&h, and so, although her chain
galled sorely, she determined to bear it
patiently.
Younah, on the other hand, although
she had learned to love all that Nature
spread so bounteously before the
wandering tribe with whom she had
dwelt, soon acquired a taste for the
comforts and refinements which now
surrounded her. She felt the incon-
venience of notbeingable to understand
the language of those with whom her
lot was now cast,and became mosteager
to acquire a knowledge of it. She
always addressed Jack by the name he
had told her was his, and before many
days had passed,' she could address Mrs.
Hargreavesand Jean by their respective
names.
It was more difficult to teach Younah
how to wield a knife and fork at her
meals than any other art which it was
necessary for her to learn. It seemed to
the girl to be such a waste of time
dividing food with such awkward
implements, when it could be done so
much more readily by the fingers and
teeth. And it was some time, too,
before she could be induced to drink
any other liquid than milk or water.
For tea, coffee, or any kind of hot
beverage, she had a great dislike.
At last the expected letter from Mr.
Manning arrived. As might have been
expected, he was greatly excited by the
news Jack had sent him. For he, too,
considered that it must indeed be Keith
St. Hill’s daughter who had been so
strangely recovered. He begged that
Jack would if possible endeavour to con
duct Younfth to Kyenrope,as he himself
was scarcely equal to the fatigue of such
a long, tedious journey as thatacross the
island was at that period. . Neither
was it without peril, for, apart
from the fact that bushrangers of
notorious character were at large and
were constantly 'committing outrages
upon travellers, several tribes of the
natives were known to be in open
hostility to every white man. In fact,
the memorable Black War was on the
eve of commencing, so that such a
journey as that from Launceston was
not to be lightly undertaken.
Captain and Mrs. Hargreaves, how-
ever, agreed with Jack and Colin that
it would be wise to remove Youn&h
from the vicinity of the spot where they
had found her, in case any of the tribe
amongst whom she had dwelt should
discover her whereabouts, and attempt
a second abduction. Not knowing
the relation in which Natone stood
to her white companion, they were
disposed to mistrust her, and con


stantly dreaded that she might escape,
and convey the intelligence to her
tribe. Besides, Younfih's new friends
coincided in the opinion that the
sooner her identity was established,
and her claims upon her kindred
recognised, the better it would be for
her interests.
' Another difficulty, however, pre-
sented itself.
“ It would not do,” argued Mrs. Har-
greaves, “ for Younfih to travel escorted
by two gentlemen only.”
, Jack looked embarrassed at this
suggestion, and wished earnestly that
his sister Dorothy were at hand to
come to his assistance.
But his kind hostess herself solved
the problem by saying, “ If Walter has
no objection, and can spare me for a
month, I will go with the party myself.
Of course,” she added, laughing,
“Walter would see that we have a
sufficiently strong escort of military to
ensure our safety.”
Both Jack and Colin were profuse in
their acknowledgments to Mrs. Har-
greaves for helping them ..out of -the,
dilemma, for they admitted that it
would have been exceedingly awkward
for them to have had the sole charge of
the young lady. Mrs. Hargreaves
obtained her husband’s consent, and
then preparation for the journey com-
menced at once.
It was decided that the party should
accompany the mail, which, owing to
the unsafe condition of the interior at
the time, was always guarded by an
escort of armed police. This, with the
detachment of soldiers told off by Cap-
tain Hargreaves to accompany his wife
and friends, was considered to be ample
protection.
No thought of including the abori-
ginal girl in the party had occurred to
any one ; all seemed to take it for
granted that she was to remain at “ The
Lodge.”
But when Younfih had been made to
understand that she was to be removed
from her present quarters, and saw
the preparations going forward, she
managed to make Jack understand her
enquiry if Natone were also going.
He shook his head,by way of negative.
But, on the morning when they were
about to set out, Natone clung to
Younfih, from whom she refused to be
separated, and, although Younfi.li her-
self requested her to remain with the
friends from whom they had received
nothing but kindness, she only became
more vehement in her protestations
that she would accompany Younfih
wherever she might go. And in the
end she prevailed, and accommodation
had to be provided for her also.
A curious cavalcade the party
made as they started from the
courtyard of “The Lodge.” A rude,
but strong, vehicle, drawn by
three horses, contained,besides the driver
and Jean, who sat beside him on a kind
of box seat, Mrs. Hargreaves and
Younfih, who sat facing each other,
while Natone squatted at their feet.
She could seldom be persuaded to seat
herself in civilised fashion. The rest of
the vehicle was appropriated to the
-luggage of the party. Jack and Colin,
who preferred to ride, were mounted on
sturdy horses. Two of the soldiers
rode in advance of the party, six others
following. The mail was to be joined
farther on, and the journey
might then be considered to have
commenced.
By this time Younfih had grown so
accustomed to the garments with which
Mrs Hargreaves had furnished her
that she no longer moved awkwardly in
them. She had learned to tolerate shoes
and stockings, and as she drove from
“ The Lodge ” beside her hostess, with a
comfortable-looking cloak about her,
and a bonnet such as girls of her age
wore in those days, carrying herself
with a grace that many a cultivated
woman might envy, Jack and Colin
began to wonder if this were indeed
the wild, untamed, although gentle,
creature they had found so strangely.
Natone still wore nothing beyond her
draperies of scarlet cloth, which were
only removed when she took her bath
in the running stream which traversed
the garden at “ The Lodge an enjoy-
ment she never missed it she could help
it.
After a week of daily travel over
ill-made roads, in places often no better
than a mere track cut through the
forest, and halts by night at wayside
inns, where the fare was, if ample, not
over dainty, the party reached the


capital in safety, having fortunatelymet
with no encounters on the road. Had
it not been for the presence of ladies
among them, Jack and Colin would have
regretted this absence of adventure, for
they were well armed, and prepared to
exchange courtesies with any bush-
rangers they might meet.
Youn&h was conducted at once to
Kyenrope, where the Mannings were
anxiously awaiting her arrival. As soon
as Mr. Manning took her hand, and
looked into her face, he exclaimed to
his wife, who stood near him, “There is
no question about it, this is Ida St.
Hill’s child. As Ida was at her age, so
is this girl. Is it not so, my dear 1 ” and
he turned with much agitation of
manner to his wife.
“ The resemblance is most striking ;
ifiie can be no other than my poor
friend’s lost child. Heaven be praised
that she has been found at last.”
Mrs. Hargreaves and the two young
Englishmen were about to take their
leave of the Mannings with the inten-
tion of proceeding to the Maudes
quarters, but YounMi, who had no
conception of the reason why she
should be so unaccountably handed
over to these strangers, evinced such
real distress at the prospect of being
separated from Jade, whom she had
long regarded as her especial benefactor
and protector, just as she had once
looked upon Eumarrah, and Mrs.
Hargreaves, whom she had learned to
love, that it was considered inadvisable
to leave the girls alone with the
Mannings.
But as Jack did not feel at all sure
that Mrs. Maude could find room for
Youn&h and Natone, as well as for the
others of the party whom she was ex-
pecting, after consulting with Mrs.
Hargreaves, he explained matters to
Mr. Manning, with the result that the
hospitality of Kyenrope was extended
to them all, and Mrs. Hargreaves and
himself decided to accept it, while Colin
offered to go to Mrs. ' Maude and
acquaint her of this change of plans.
CHAPTER XX.
Before her wondering eyes appeared
A strange and curious scene.
RICHARDSON.
TCVr\ RS. Maude drove over to Kyen-
Nlh/ ro P e on following day.
AJ- v* After she had exchanged
greetings with her brother and Mrs.
Hargreaves, she turned to the former,
and said with an amused smile, “ And
so your prot6g6 refuses to be separated
from you ! Don’t you think you will
find that a little tiresome ?”
“Oh! that is only just now. When
she has made more acquaintances
among civilised beings, she will perhaps
be glad to drop me. The worst of it is
that,] ust now,one feels obliged to remain
at Kyenrope.”
“ But that is not necessary, for
I came expressly to tell you that
we can manage to have you all,
wild girls as well as you and Mrs.
Hargreaves. I don’t suppose the
Mannings will object to the girl coming
to me. After all, you found her, and
ought to be considered her guardian.”
“ She certainly regards me in that
light. Well, I shall be very glad to go
to you, and if you will help to train
this child of Nature into your way
you will be doing a charitable action.”
“Pray present Miss St. Hill, Jack,
for so we must, I suppose, call her. I
am most anxious to see her.”
The introduction was made, and as
YounMi glanced up rather shyly at
Mrs. Maude, and saw in her face some
reflection of Jack’s features and ex-
pression, she gave her hand as she had
been taught to do, \vith an air of
confidence.
Next day Youn&h and Natone,
accompanied by Mrs. Hargreaves and
Jack, left the Mannings, and went to
Hobart Town to the Maudes.
The news of Youn&h’s arrival, and the
strange story of the way in which she
was found, soon spread about the city,
and caused some sensation. For there
were many there who recalled the sad
story of the misfortune that had
befallen the St. Hills.
Mr. Manning arranged that a gover


ness should be obtained for Younah, as
her education must now commence. It
was agreed that until her parents
could be communicated with she had
better be considered as Mr. Manning’s
ward, he offering to defray all expenses
incurred for her. And as soon as she
could be made to understand her posi-
tion it was decided that she and
Natone were to return to Kyenrope.
Younah made rapid progress in the
acquirement of her own language, and
she never seemed to need any stronger
incentive than that of a few words of
approval from Jack when she met him
for a short exercise in conversation
daily.
At last the day came when she was
able to speak to him so fluently and
intelligibly, as well as to understand
what he said to her, that he ventured
to question her as to the story of her
life. All that she could remember of
her life witli the Pialummas she[related
to him. But when she came to the
recital of Eumarrah’s account of her
abduction by the tribe, and told how
Eumarrah had made his people refrain
from removing her necklace, the neck-
lace which, as she said, she had always
worn, Jack saw that no link was
wanting in the chain of evidence that
proved her to be St. Hill’s daughter.
Younah spent two months at Mis.
Maude’s house, and then at Jack’s par-
ticular request she consented to return
to Kyenrope, there to await the de-
cision of her parents as to her future
movements.
Jack and Colin were now about to
return to England, as the term which
they had been allowed for their absence
from home had long expired, and Colin’s
parents were becoming anxious for his
return.
It must not be supposed that, amid
new scenes and new friends, Younah
forgot herfaithful Eu marrah. When she
and Natone were alone they frequently
spoke of him, and wondered what he
would say if ever he returned to the
cave in which he left them and found
that they had gone.
“ He will think the white men have
killed us,” Natone would suggest; but
YounAh would answer “No; for he
knows that I am of their blood, and
that they would not harm me. But if
Eumarrah were only with us, Natone, I
should be quite happy.” And at such
moments, when the remembrance of all
that the generous-minded savage had
done for her ever since she had lived
among the Pialummas came into her
mind, her eyes would fill with tears,and
her voice would tremble if she spoke.
Mrs. Manning noticed the sad ex-
pression of the girl’s face upon one
occasion, and as she could not under-
stand the language in which YounAh
and Natone had been conversing, she
said, “ Are you unhappy, my dear 1
Tell me if there is anything you desire.”
YounAh explained that they had been
speaking or Eumarrah, and their
uneasiness as to his fate, since he had
promised to abandon his tribe to return
for them.
“ But he was a bad man, or he would
not have stolen you from your home,
and caused your parents long years of
misery and uncertainty. He should be
severely punished if ever he be caught!”
“ But you know that our people, the
white men, were cruel to the tribe first.
They took away Eumarrah’s sister, and
stole their ground. And Eumarrah is
not a bad man. He loved me, and
was always good to me !” answered
YounAh with indignation.
As soon as possible, Keith St. Hill
wrote to the Mannings acknowledging
the receipt of the glad tidings that his
little Keitha had been found. He said
that as yet he could hardly realise the
truth of the intelligence.
His wife, who had never recovered
from the shock caused by the loss of
her child, was in delicate health, and
she could not be permitted to under-
take the voyage out to the colony, and
under the circumstances, he could not
leave her for such a long period. He
stated, too, that Ida was not yet aware
that Keitha had been recovered ; she
had only been informed that a clue to
her whereabouts had been discovered,
and she was so greatly excited by this
news that he would have to break the
truth to her gradually, lest she should
insist upon hastening to claim her child,
and so greatly endanger her own life.
St. Hill added that he had forwarded
a sum of money through his banker’s
agents sufficient to cover all the ex-
penses of his daughter’s outfit and


passage to England, and he would
leave it in the hands of his old friends,
the Mannings, to engage a lady to ac-
company her on the homeward voyage,
as well as to make all other necessary
arrangements.
Mrs. Wilson, the lady who had
been, and, indeed, still was YounMi’s
governess, cheerfully accepted the
responsibility of conducting her pupil
to England, and, as the latter refused
to go unless Natone could accompany
her, it was arranged that passages for
the three shou Id be secu red in th e “ Flying
Scud,” which had but recently arrived
in port witha contingent of immigrants,
and was already rehtting for the voyage
home.
CHAPTER XXI.
Purple and bright
Bursts on the billows the flashing of light
Over the glad waves, like a child of the
sun
See the tall vessel goes gallantly on.
HARVEY.
OURING the long period which a
sailing vessel took at that time to
accomplish the vovage to Eng-
land, Mrs. Wilson found ample
leisure for the cultivation of her pupil’s
mind. She found the task a compara-
tively easy, as well as most interesting,
one, for Younah was not only apt at
learning all that her preceptress wished
to impart, but she was inquisitive about
many matters upon which that lady
was often at a loss to enlighten her.
Natone’s intelligence was not equal to
herfidelity, and after a short but ineffec-
tual struggle to teach her the rudiments
of the English language, Mrs. Wilson
gave'up the task, and contented herself
with helping the girl to acquire a
limited conversational knowledge.
Younah and Natone always conversing
in the aboriginal tongue, left this duty
entirely to Sirs. Wilson.
By the time the voyage was concluded
Younah could talk fluently and correctly;
since she spoke exactly as her teacher
did, she was never noticed to make
a grammatical error.
From the time she had undertaken
her duties of chaperone and governess
to Younah, Mrs. Wilson always ad-
dressed her as Keitha, “ For,” she
remarked, “ it is right that you should
grow accustomed to the name which
properly belongs to you. Your parents
only think of you as Keitha; your
sister has been taught to speak of you
by that name, and by it all your friends
will henceforth address you.”
“ But Natone will never understand
that Younah is not my name. She
has known rne as Youn&h all her
life, and to myself any other sounds
strange.”
“ Well, there can be no objection to
Natone continuing to call you Younah
still. It is a pretty name, I must admit,
but you will soon grow quite as familiar
with your own.”
“ My sister, Mona ! how strange it is
to think I have a sister, that I have
had one all these years, and never knew
her. I wonder if she will be glad to see
me 1 ” said Younah thoughtfully.
As Mrs. Wilson did not know any
of the members of Mr. St. Hill’s
family personally, she was unable to
satisfy any of her pupil’s vague won-
derings about them. But she laboured
diligently to fit her charge for the
position she would occupy in the
future.
And Younah had been trained to
conduct herself with propriety at
meal times ; could even ply the needle ;
and had learned to read ‘and write
tolerably well.
Captain Lister was muck interested
in his passengers, for Mrs. Wilson,
YounMi, and Natone were the only ones
proceeding to England that trip, and
he often questioned Younah about her
experiences in the bush.
And as Natone was the first of her
race who had made the voyage to
England, she naturally came in for a
good share of attention. Her comforts
had not been overlooked when the
outfit for her companion had been
under consideration, and as the weather


became less mild and pleasant than
that of her own native clime, she was
induced to assume a costume more in
keeping with her surroundings. Her
natural love of bright colour had been
studied, too, and she usually wore a
loosely-made gown of scarlet flannel,
confined at the waist by a broad belt;
a turban-like toque of similar material
formed her head-dress, and she even
wore shoes, which she could slip off
when she desired, but she could not
tolerate stockings.
It was not without some trouble that
Natone had been able to accommodate
herself to the civilised fashion of
sleeping upon a mattress, and within
the confined space enclosed by four
walls too ! Indeed she had always
taken her repose stretched upon the
floor until the voyage had commenced,
when her sufferings from sea-sick-
ness had rendered her so helpless
that she scarcely knew or cared where
she was. Now she occupied a berth
in a small cabin close to that which
Younfih and Mrs. Wilson shared be-
tween them.
At meal time she contentedly waited
until the captain, officers, and the
others had finished, for to this she
had been accustomed all her life, and
then thankfully took what was allotted
to her.
Younah’s dark blue, rough serge
costume suited her to perfection, and
the captain often cast approving
glances at her as he noticed her slim,
graceful form moving about the deck,
or leaning over the bulwarks. Her long
hair no more floated unconfined over
her shoulders, it was now decorously
disposed into a long thick plait, buta few
stray locks would escape from beneath
the hood she wore at sea and wander
across her forehead, where the ocean
breeze sported with them The captain
explained to the always - enquiring
Younfih the meaning of every rope,
mast, and sail upon the Flying Scud,
teaching her to call them by their
nautical designation, so that Mrs.
Wilson was often amused as well as
puzzled by her references to the mizzen-
mast, the port bow, or the leeward
side, and similar terms, which were
all alike unintelligible to her. But
the greatest wonder of all to Younfih
was that the captain could find his
way across the illimitable ocean,
wherein no path could be seen, and
that he could do this during the dark-
ness of night, as well as in the light
of day.
And when he showed her his chart,
upon which he indicated the small spot
of the world’s surface from which they
had sailed, and marked therein Van
Hiemen’s Land, and pointed out
England at the other extremity of the
globe, she marvelled still more that
he should be able to direct his course
with such unerring certainty.
At last the voyage came to an end,
and the Flying Scud was safely
anchored in Plymouth Sound. Here a
Eleasant surprise awaited Younah. She
ad been led to expect that her father
would meet her on arrival, and she had
been thinking of her meeting with him
with some degree of anxiety. She had a
dread of encountering a perfect stranger
who would have the right of controlling
all her future, and she knew not
whether she should be_ able to love
him. But an expression of pleased
surprise made her face quite radiant
as she saw a boat approaching the
vessel, from whose sides she had been
watching its progress across the water.
For as the boat drew near she re-
cognised one of its occupants. This
was her old friend and rescuer, Jack
Ormond.
At sight of his familiar face all
Younah’s doubts and fears fled, and
only a happy welcome beamed from her
eyes as she saw him spring up the
gangway to meet her.
A gentleman of about forty years of
age followed him, and in another
moment Jack, having warmly greeted
Youn&h, and received her expressions
of welcome, was presenting Keith St.
Hill to his long-lost daughter. St. Hill
trembled visibly as he drew his child
within his arms, and kissed her cheek,
lips, and brow-. Then he held her at
arm’s length while his eyes took in
eagerly every detail of her face and
figure. “My lost darling, Ida’s child !
welcome to your father’s heart,” he
exclaimed.
For he, too, had quickly recognised
the strong resemblance that Youn&h
bore to her mother, as he remembered


her in early youth, and it was not
without an efiort that he subdued his
emotion.
Younah herself was moved by the
earnestness of her father’s greeting.
She was a little surprised, too, that
he did not seem quite a stranger. Per-
haps it was because he came ac-
companied by the friend she prized
beyond all others, Jack, that he too
seemed familiar to her.
She did not realise then that it was
the voice of Nature stirring within her
the ties of kindred, that had so long
slumbered
The meeting between the long-parted
father and child over, Jack hastened
the preparations for quitting the Flying
Scud, and after taking leave of Captain
Lister with many acknowledgments of
his kindness, the party landed at Ply-
mouth, where they remained for the
night.
Jack explained to Younah that he
had arrived in England about three
months before she had, and that after
a short "visit to his people at Summerlea
he lost no time in going to Rosscrag,
where the St. Hills were living, having
succeeded Mr. Trevor, proprietor of
the estate.
Jack had related minutely all the
events connected with his memorable
trip to the Cataract Gorge, when he
had been so fortunate as to meet the
fugitives then hiding within the rocky
enclosure. Keith St. Hill never wearied
ofj (listening to the story of his
daughter’s providential recovery, nor
of thanking over and over again the
man who had been the instrument of it.
Mrs. St. Hill had long been an invalid,
but the news that her daughter would
soon be restored to her brought once
more the light of hope to her faded face,
and seemed to inspire her with a new
incentive to live.
Mona, too, Jack informed Younah,
seemed wild with delightat the prospect
of having a sister of her own, “ an elder
sister, too,” she said, and remarked that
most girls who had new sisters, had
younger ones.
Natone was almost as pleased as
Younah was to see Jack again, and
seemed prepared to accept with un-
questioning faith every suggestion of
his as to her conduct in the new land
to which she had come.
The St. Hills’ carriages were at
Plymouth awaiting the arrival of the
ship, and in these the journey to Eoss-
crag was to be made. Arrangements had
been made to place Natone in the
carriage reserved for the servants, all
of whom were of course unknown to
the girl. But Younah, noticing her
distress at the prospect of being sepa-
rated from herself, begged that room
might be made in their own conveyance.
This could only be done by dispensing
with the coachman’s services, and as
Jack solved the difficulty by volunteer-
ing to drive himself,the matter was thus
arranged to the satisfaction of every
one.
CHAPTER XXII.
He sees through the rents of the scattering
fogs
The corroboree warlike and grim.
And the lubra who sat by the fire on the
logs
To watch, like a mourner for him.
KENDAL.
& PERIOD of five years had
/V passed away since the events
gtl&X) in the last chapter took place.
Five years fraught with
4 4> consequences to many whose
names have been recorded in these
pages. Years, during whose passage
the last blow was struck, the last
ineffectual struggle for liberty made
by an already fast disappearing race.
The Black War, as it is called in
Tasmanian history, was ended, and the
hapless creatures who had once pos-
sessed this fair land, driven frpm one
refuge to another, encompassed on all
sides by the enemies of their race, were
at length captured, —or at least the
miserable remnant of them were—and


transported far from the hunting
grounds they had known and loved to
a bleak and desolate island, from whose
shores they could with tear-dimmed
eyes behold the distant outlines of the
land that was theirs no more.
At Wybia Suma (Flinders Island)
were gathered together the few abori-
ginals who survived the cruel ravages
of warfare and disease. Many tribes
had been exterminated entirely. Of
the rest but a few representatives of
each remained, and most of these were
men and women already past their
youth, and scarcely any children at all
were to be seen.
Some attempts at compensation for
the loss the aboriginals had sustained
by the appropriation of their lands was
made by establishing a settlement at
Wybia Suma under the protection of
the Government, at whose expense pro-
visions and shelter were supplied to
those who now languished in captivity.
For the food of which they partook
was theirs without the necessity of
hunting for it as of yore—and thus
there was no necessity for them to take
that exercise to which they had ever
been accustomed. Appetite failed, sick-
ness and death too soon followed.
Among the captives who dwelt at
Wybia Suma were many whose names
are familiar to the reader, Manalagaua,
Euraarrah, Makooi, Pillah and Leonalle.
Warnee, the chief of the Pialumma
tribe, had been slain in one of the
encounters with the white settlers, and
Makooi, more vindictive than ever,
albeit she was powerless to avenge her
new wrongs, had been compelled to
surrender with the rest of the tribe to
superior numbers.
On their arrival at the island which
was destined to be their new home, they
had been met by Pillah, who with her
savage husband—Binoya, the warrior
who had borne her away an unwilling
bride—had been among the earlier
arrivals.
Manalagaua had rushed to greet
Pillah, to whom he had in native
fashion been affianced, and she declared
that henceforward she would own no
other lord than Manalagaua. And
fruitless were alFappeals to the authori-
ties who ruled th'e settlement, made by
Binoya to recover his wife.
Eumai rah, of whom nothing has been
recorded since he conducted the fugi-
tives Youn4h and Natone to what lie
deemed was a safe retreat, having
returned to his place among the
Pialummas, brought all his influence to
bear upon the tribe to induce them to
abandon their hunting grounds in the
vicinity of the Weena.
He had argued that the white settlers
would certainly discover that they had
been possessed of Youn&h, for he
reasoned that she and Natone must
have fallen into the white men’s hands,
since as the day closed, and evening fell
without bringing the girls back to the
gunyahs, and none of the tribe had seen
aught of them, there was no other
theory to account for their absence.
He played so successfully upon their
dread of the white men’s fire-carrying
weapons, that it was unanimously
decided to remove from so dangerous a
locality without delay. And so
Eumarrah had been able to give the
signal which was to notify to the
fugitives the fact that the Pialummas
were in retreat. But when, after four
days, Eumarrah had been able to steal
away from his tribe, and to return to
the old locality by another route, so
that suspicion might be averted in case
of his motive for desertion being sus-
pected—his dismay at not finding the
girls where he had left them, nor indeed
anywhere about their known haunts,
although he gave signal after signal
which they could have answered, was
pitiable.
For he was convinced that his theory
of their having fallen into the hands of
white men had in very truth been
carried into practice, and that the girls
were lost to him for ever. Still he did
not abandon his hope that they had
but strayed beyond the limits of these
hunting grounds, and that they would
return to the cave to await his return,
Filled with this idea he remained in
the vicinity for more than a week, and
then he went dejectedly away, whither
he knew or cared not. For he deter-
mined not to return to his ow r n people,
who would think he had left them for
some treacherous reason.
Avoiding the white settlements as
far as possible, he directed his steps
towards the interior of the island, sub


sisting upon such roots, berries, and
fruit as he found by the way. In this
aimless fashion, following the banks of
the Weena, he came at last to that part
of the country where the stream nows
between high banks, close by where the
village of Perth once flourished—but
now stagnates.
Keeping within shelter of the shrubs
which margined the river—for a new ly
built white settlement was at no
distance from him —Eumarrah heard a
piercing scream. The voice he recog-
nised as that of some woman in distress.
Thoughts of Youn&h rushed at once
to his mind, and heedless of the care he
had taken so lately to conceal himself,
he sprang into the open space.
About twenty yards from where he
stood he saw a young woman standing
wringing her hands in a frantic way,
and gazing distractedly down at the
water which flowed tranquilly enough
below.
Eumarrah followed the direction of
her eyes, and presently saw a little form
rise to the surface of the stream. In
an instant his quick intelligence under-
stood what had happened.
Without hesitation the savage
sprang from the spot whereon he stood,
and his dark form seemed to cleave the
air ere he dived beneath the water and
seized the drowning child, with which
he swam ashore, all being accomplished
in a few brief moments.
Then he took the child to his mother,
at whose feet he laid him, but, seeing
that she was paralysed with fright and
anguish, he remained beside her until
he had succeeded in restoring animation
to the boy.
When the woman heard the welcome
sound of her child’s voice crying, she
lifted him up, and kissed him passion-
ately, then turned to thank his rescuer.
She took Eumarrah by the arm, and
pointing to the farm, signified to him
that he must accompany her thither.
She was anxious that her husband
should reward him for his gallant action,
but Eumarrah, who had not done any-
thing that seemed remarkable to him-
self, fancied she required assistance in
conveying the child to his home, and
so, taking it from her arms, he carried
it, walking beside her as she led the
way.
The result of this adventure was that
Eumarrah, being hospitably entertained
at Alcroft Farm, and feeling himself
isolated from his own race, stayed there
from day to day, picking up, as quickly
as all the aborigines did, a knowledge
of the language of the people around
him, and performing for them many
services. The child whom he had
rescued from a watery grave was
seldom absent from him, and the
parents never felt so well assured of
their boy’s safety as when he was with
Eumarrah,
Here he remained until the evil days
in which the stern decree went forth
that no one of [aboriginal blood might
abide upon his native soil. In vain did
the Hewitts plead with the authorities,
that, in recompense for the signal
service he _ had rendered them,
Eumarrah might be allowed to dwell
with them. The law would make no
exception, and so Eumarrah was forced
to leave his peaceful retreat, and bid
adieu to his native land.
At Wybia Suma, he met again all
who remained of his tribe.


CHAPTER XXIII.
Merry are the village bells that sound with
soothing chime,
And gaily are they borne along upon the
summer air
Telling of bridal happicess to the youthful
and the fair.
CARRINGTON.
7T>HE five years which had brought
'•l*' such disastrous changes to the
-I- Pialummas, as well as to all the
aboriginal tribes of Tasmania, had been
as eventful to the St. Hills, although in
quite a different way.
For the dark pages of their history,
which began with the burning of
“ Karoola,” and continued during all the
vears of suspense and grief which they
had endured until the news of Keitha’s
discovery came to dispel the clouds
which had shadowed their lives, seemed
now closed for ever.
The full measure of maternal love
which henceforward filled Mrs. St.
Hill’s life, proved efficacious to restore
some of the youthful bloom to her wan
cheeks. And her voice might often
now be heard rippling in musical
laughter with her two daughters,
Keitha and Mona, both of whom were
taller than herself.
St. Hill himself, whose hair had been
tinged prematurely with grey, during
the years when he not only mourned
the loss of his firstborn, but watched
his idolised wife drooping and declin-
ing into a hopeless melancholy which
he was powerless to avert, seemed to
grow young again under the happier
auspices that shone upon his home.
Mrs Trevor had only survived the
return of the St. Hills to England two
years, and as all her wealth had been
left unreservedly to her niece, Ida, all
anxiety concerning financial matters
w’as removed from Keith St. Hill. But
the years which followed Mrs. Trevor’s
death had been spent for the greater
part by him in endeavouring to divert
Ida’s thoughts from the one great
sorrow of her life ; and to aid him in
doing so, he was continually moving
about from one place to another, in the
hope that constant change of scene
would prevent her from dwelling so
much upon the fixed idea that she was
responsible for what had happened,
because she had allowed the child to
stray beyond her sight for one moment.
The precious necklace which had led
to Keitha’s identification was now
regarded by Mrs. St. Hill as the most
precious of all her valuable jewels.
She had a special casket made for its
reception, and a document which
detailed its eventful history during the
time when its whereabouts had been
a mjstery to her, accompanied this
precious relic of her daughter’s strange
adventures.
Mrs. St. Hill never wearied in listen-
ing to the recital of all that Keitha had
to tell her about the good friend
Eumarrah, who had befriended her
from the very hour in which the Pia-
lummas had become possessed of her,
until that in which he effected her
escape from them. And she would
wonder how they could reward the
noble savage for all his goodness to her
darling.
When Keitha told her parents of the
motives of revenge which had actuated
the tribe to commit the outrage which
had overshadowed their lives, and when
she described in her artless way the
hardships endured by the natives as
they were huntedfrom placet© place she
excited their sympathy, rather than
their anger, against those who had
wrecked their home. For now that
their child was restored to them, the
St. Hills could afford to be generous,
and to forgive those whom they ad-
mitted to be a persecuted race.
“What would you like to do for
Eumarrah, Keitha ? ” her father asked
her one day.
“Oh ! I would buy for him the old
hunting grounds of his race, and give
them to mm, so that neither black nor
white men could ever take them from
him again ! ” she answered quickly.
But St. Hill shook his head, and said,
“I fear that can never be, Keitha.
The nearest approach to that scheme
we can hope to accomplish would be to
secure a portion of the old grounds and
settle Eumarrah upon it, assuring to
him such a yearly sum as would enable
him to provide himself with all that
was necessary to his well-being as long
as he lives. Such a gift as that it may
be yours to give him some day.”
Keitha kissed her father by way of
thanks.


Natone received a due amount of
attention from all Keitha’s relatives.
She continued to address the companion
of former days by the familiar appella-
tion of Younah, upon whom she waited
now, having learned quickly to become
a very useful and expert handmaiden.
She had grown accustomed not only to
most of the strange usages of civilisa-
tion, but also to the rigorous climate of
England, although she often spoke
longingly to her young mistress or the
sunny skies they had left so far behind,
and wished that she might see them
again.
“ So you may, some of these days,
Natone. We might all go out there yet,
and of course you would come too. 1
want to find Euraarrah, you know.”
Keitha’s education was completed
under the immediate supervision of her
parents, and Mona, who was, of course
much more advanced in knowledge
than her elder sister, gave valuable aid
to those who were entrusted with the
task of teaching.
When the governesses had done their
part, the St. Hills took their daughters
abroad, where they were able to acquire
not only a practical knowledge of
modern languages, but a taste for the
fine arts.
Occasional visits had been made by
Jack Ormond and Colin Dyer to
Rosscrag during the years which
followed Keitha’s arrival in England,
and for them there was ever the
warmest of welcomes, for did not the
St. Hills owe to these young men all
their present happiness ?
Nor could Keitha ever forget that
Jack was the first friend she had made
who was of her own colour, and in her
estimation he was the noblest of his
race, as Eumarrah was of his.
About the time that the St. Hills
went abroad with their daughter, Jack
and Colin carried out their long de-
ferred plan of visiting America, and
thus it happened that when they
all met again, Keitha had developed
into a beautiful worn in, endowed
with all the graces that culture could
give.
It would have been difficult to realise
that the Miss St. Hill, who was every-
where spoken of as a beauty and an
heiress, could in any way be identified
with the forlorn waif of the retaote
Tasmanian bush, whose couch had been
for years only the grass or ferns of the
woodlands, her food berries and
roots, and her raiment the undressed
skin of animals. Now the daintiest
garments adorned her form, her abun-
dant hair was arranged in the most
approved style, while not even Mona,
who had the advantage of het 1 in
the culture of early years, could
surpass her in grace and refine-
ment.
The return of the St. Hills to Eoss-
crag was celebrated by a series of
festivities, which were to serve for the
bringing out of both sisters.
At the opening ball, while the danc-
ing was going on, Keitha quietly
slipped away, and sought Natone,
whom she knew was probably alone
in her mistress’s apartment. Keitha found
her there as she thought, and beckoned
to her to follow. Throwing a dark
cloak over her white evening gown,
Keitha opened a side door which led
out into the shrubbery. From thence
she passed into the conservatory
which was connected with the ball-
room. She led Natone within, and
taking up a position beneath a large
palm, with the aborigine beside her,
she said to her, “ Look, within Natone ;
■what would the Fialumraas think of
such a scene ? Would they not think
it was a grand corroboree ? ”
Natone, who had never before been
dazzled by such a vision of splendour,
gazed on without the power to reply.
Keitha enjoyed her wonder and
amazement, and as she- turned to leave
the conservatory almost ran into the
arras of Jack Ormond. • I
“Ah ! you runaway ! ” he exclaimed,
“ I have been roaming about in search
of you. What, Natone here too 1 I
believe you have both been wishing
yourselves back in the bush. Have
you been teaching Natone to admire
or to despise the vanities of civilised
life?”
“ Oh ! never mind what we have been
doing,” Keitha answered with a spice
of mischief in her eyes. “ Natone has
seen quite ad good dancing in the
corroborees by the banks of the Weena.
But come now, Natone, I will take you
back by the way we came. If any


of the guests see you, they will torment
you with all sorts of curious questions.”
Of course, Jack accompanied them
as .they left the conservatory, and when
they had left Natone to return to her
own quarters, Jack turned to Keitha,
and taking her hands within his own
said as he looked down at her, “ Keitha,
I have loved you, I believe, from
the hour in which we met. Da you
think you can ever love me so as
to give me the right to be beside you
always 1 ”
There was no coquetry in Keitha’s
nature, but the roses on her cheeks
deepened as she replied, “ I know
that I can, Jack. My future belongs
to you.” Then her lover stooped and
kissed her, and thus their faith was
plighted.
Keitha and Mona went to London
soon afterwards, as the St. Hills had
taken a house for the season, and soon
their time was filled up with engage-
ments. Their position as joint heiress
brought them invitations to most
of the smart functions of the season,
and as a natural consequence oilers
of marriage followed, and more than
one brilliant alliance was declined by
Keitha. Some version of her strange
history had been circulated, and the
girl found that she was regarded
with a greater degree of interest in
consequence.
On the return of the family to Ross-
crag the wedding took place. The St.
Hills were very unwilling to lose Keitha
again, but Jack overcame all their
scruples by promising that no question
of losing her need arise. Summerlea
was at no great distance from Rosscrag,
and a constant interchange of visits
could take place.
But Keitha’s arguments were more
irresistible, for she reminded her
parents that she owed Eumarrah a debt
of gratitude for his protection of her
during all the years of her captivity,
and that if any reward was to be given
him for his devotion, it should be done
quickly. And no one could undertake
the task so well as she could.
So it was all settled that immediately
after the wedding Jack and his bride
should sail for the far-off island where
he had met her, and having arranged
for Eumarrah’s future, returnonce more
to England. Natone, of course, should
accompany her mistress.
CHAPTER XXIV.
That every tribe though placed as He sees
best
Where seas or deserts part them from the
rest.
Differing in language, manners, or in face
Might feel themselves allied to all the race.
COWPER.
WHEN Jack Ormond and his wife
reached Hobart Town after a
prosperous voyage, which was
not marked by .any remarkable event,
but which had nevertheless proved to
be a very happy period to them, they
learned for the first time that all the
survivors of that race, to whom the
land had formerly belonged, had been
banished from it by the stronger one
which had ousted them.
The Maudes had long since left the
colony for some other part of His
Majesty’s dominions; but the Man-
nings still resided at Kyenrope, where
they gave a hearty welcome to the
Ormonds.
Jack grasped Mr. Manning’s hand
warmly as he said, “ But for you, sir, I
should never have known that Keitha
was the lost child of the St. Hills.
Your minute description of the neck-
lace worn by her was the clue which I
followed up so successfully, as it
happened. But my wife is full of
anxiety to discover if the man to whom
she owes her preservation from all
harm during her captivity be still
alive. For it is on his account that
we have undertaken this voyage to
the colony.”
“Perhaps you are aware that all
aborigines who survived the “Black


War ” have been sent to Flinders 1 ”
said Mr. Manning.
“ Yes,” Jack replied, “we have been
so informed, but the difficulty now is to
discover Eumarrah’s fate.”
“ Well, it will be easy to ascertain
whether any native of that name
now dwells at Flinders. As a record
of all their names is sure to be
kept at the Government Offices, you
will be able to see if his appears
among them.”
Jack lost no time in acting upon
this suggestion, and, after some
vexatious delays, caused by official
red-tapeism, he brought to Keitha a
list of names of all the survivors of the
aboriginal race.
To her great joy she saw that
Euraarrah’s name appeared in the list,
and she recognised other familiar names
as well, those of Pillah, Leonalle, and
others. But she missed the names of
Warnee and Makooi. So Eumarrah
was now chief of the small remnant of
his once powerful tribe.
Permission was obtained in due form
for the Ormonds to visit the aboriginal
station at Flinders, and the next step
was to arrange about chartering a small
vessel to convey them thither.
As this could be done more conveni-
ently at the northern end of the island,
it was decided that they should proceed
to Launceston overland, and a carriage
was engaged in which to make the
journey. For the days of stage coaches
in the colony had not yet ar-
rived, and the mails were transported
in a rude cart. The country was in a
safer and more settled condition than
it had been when Jack and Keitha had
traversed the same route years ago.
Natone’s joy at being once more in
her own country was very touching to
see. While on the journey northward,
she would frequently ask permission to
alight from the carriage, in order that
she might go and touch some familiar
looking tree or shrub. She would lie
with her ear upon the ground to catch
the movement of some creature such as
she had been wont to hunt in olden
times. All her caprices of this kind
were indulged, for Keitha well knew
how great was the love which the
natives cherished for their free, wood-
land life.
The settlement, which had consisted
but of a few straggling, small houses
when Jack had visited Launceston
before, had increased to very respectable
dimensions, and there was even an
hotel at which fair accommodation \ras
to be obtained. Boats also were avail-
able, and Jack obtained one in which
he and Keitha went up the Gorge
as far as they could be rowed ; then
they scrambled across rocks, and
through shrubs and dense undergrowth
afterwards, until they reached the spot
where they two had first met.
“ Younah,’ said Jack, “ for I roust
call you by that name here, tell me
what you thought of me that day when
you saw me for the first time 1 ”
“ Well, that was not the first time I
saw you, as it happens, sir. Were you
not here once before ? ”
“ Yes, but where were you 1 ” he asked.
Then she told him how his appear-
ance with Colin in their hunting
grounds had been reported to the tribe
by Natone and herself, and of the result
of that intelligence.
“ Now,” said Keitha, “ I want you to
enter that rock chamber, in which your
dog killed my poor little kangaroo, and
see if there be any trace of its remains.”
Jack went into the cave, and
presently returned carrying the com-
plete skeleton of the little animal.
Keitha took it from him, and looked
at it sadly, saying, “ Poor wee lyenna !
how I wish I could have taken it away
with me unharmed. It was so faithful
to me always. But, Jack, we will keep
this relic of a faithful, although dumb
friend.”
Keitha led Jack to the spot where
her gunyah had once stood, and
pointed out the level grassy plot
whereon the corroboree was danced, and
many another well remembered spot.
After a week’s sojourn near "her old
home, the vessel was announced to be
ready, and they embarked for Flinders
Island, taking Natone with them.
Two days sail brought them to their
destination. Neither Keitha nor Jack
were favourably impressed by the ap-
pearance of the spot which had been
selected as a home for the aborigines.
On their arrival at the station, the
hospitality of the superindent’s house
was offered to them, and from that


official they elicited the sad information
that most of the natives were pining of
home-sickness.
But when Keitha at last came face to
face once more with the man whom she
had come so far to see, she could
scarcely believe that it was indeed
Eumarrah. For he was already so far
advanced in consumption—a disease
which rapidly thinned the ranks of the
already reduced number of aborigines
—that he could not speak without
great difficulty, while his once strong
frame was painfully emaciated.
Eumarrah recognised Keitha, how-
ever, and when she spoke to him
addressed her as Youndh. But he
looked upon her now with some degree
of awe, for she was not the Youn&h of
the woodland, the simple child whom
he had befriended, any longer.
Keitha entered his modest little
dwelling and sat down beside him
while she held his dusky hands within
her own, so slim and white,and sparkling
with gems. The poor fellow’s eyes
overflowed, and Keitha mingled her
tears with his as she recognised what a
wreck of his former self he had become.
There was a long story to be told on
both sides, and when Eumarrah heard
that Keitha had been restored to her
father, his gratification was very ap-
parent.
He told her that his mother, Makooi,
had not long survived her banishment
to Flinders, and that Warnee had been
slain in the Black War. Keitha brought
in her husband then, for he had re-
mained without that these two might
talk unreservedly. Then he drew from
Eumarrah the account of Keitha’s
abduction from her home, and of the
destruction of the homestead, more
minute particulars of which he now
gave than he had been able to impart
to the girls when he was taking leave
of them.
While this conference was proceeding,
Naione had discovered some of her old
associates of her happier days, and
related to them the marvellous things
which had happened to herself. She
told them of the great ocean over which
she had voyaged, and of all the wonders
she had seen in that great land beyond
the seas.
Keitha visited her old friends Pillah
and Leonalle also, by whom she was
warmly welcomed. Seeing that they
greatly admired the rings she was wear-
ing, she took two of them from her
fingers and gave one to each of them,
to their great delight.
At an interview with the doctor,
Jack learned from him that Eumarrah's
days were nearing their close, and that
his survival was only a question of a
few weeks. Beyond the addition of
medical comforts, extra blankets, and
such luxuries as were not included in
the daily rations doled out by the
Government, nothing could be done to
improve his condition.
Keitha’s benevolent scheme was not
destined, therefore, to be carried out,
for it was announced to her, besides,
that no aboriginal would be permittee
to return to the mainland under any
circumstances, without an especial
order from the Governor.
Keitha’s leave-taking from her old
friend and protector was a very sad
one, for both realised that they would
never meet again on earth. But as
Eumarrah had learned to speak and
understand English, and had also
profited by the religious instructions
given by the chaplain so far as to com-
Erehend something of the Christian’s
ope of a life beyond the grave, they
were able to derive some mutual com-
fort from the conviction that brighter
and happier days would await the
black man as well as the white man in
another world.
Keitha could not look upon Eumar-
rah’s weeping face as the vessel by
which she was returning to the main-
land bore her from his sight, and it was
not until every trace of the outline of
Flinders had disappeared that Jack was
able to soothe her into a calmer frame
of mind.
Natone was equally moved at her
leave-taking with her people, but she
no longer desired to dwell among them,
or to share the life that was so different
from the wild, free existence in which
never a care beyond the present dis-
turbed the serenity, in which her child-
hood’s days had been passed.
Notwithstanding that Jack and
Keitha despatched the vessel by which
they returned to Launceston back to
Flinders with bountiful supplies of all


that was nourishing and dainty to he
obtained at the period, so as to prolong
and comfort Eumarrah’s last days, that
noble-hearted savage only lingered long
enough for the tidings of his death to
reach Keitha ere she set out upon her
homeward voyage.
But she never forgot Eumarrah, and
his name was often murmured in the
ears of her children in the years that
followed, as they clustered beside her
in the gloaming, and begged her to tell
the tales of which the little ones never
seemed to weary.
the end
“Mercury” Office, Hobart.
