

MAKE
YOUR DEALER
YOUR
SERVICE
See bint regularly
'
> - •>-
£ J?
Ho know* YOUR
CAR and is in «
position to condor you
better service.
His SERVICE DE-
PARTMENT offers
you capable, friendly
co-operation.
His SERVICE PER-
SONNEL have a
thorough knowledge
of your car.
He receives service
information regularly
from the General
Motors' factories and
laboratories.
le usos tools for your
car ifrpifciaify devised
and factory-approved.
He abides by the
terms of the "G.M.H.
Service Policy."
IS to his interest to
that you get the
ible service.
YOUR DEALER OFFERS
SER VICE
ESALE!
OWNERS
MANUAL
Your Chevrolet
GENERAL MOTORS-HOLDEN'S LTD.


TABLE OF CONTENTS
t
PAGE
Specifications and Licence Data 2
Controls and Instruments 3
Identification Numbers 4
Controls and Instruments 4
Operating the Car when New ..*. ... 13
Use of the Controls 13
Proper Care of the Car 18
Body Ventilation ... „ 39
Performance—Economy—Safety 41
Diagnosis in Emergencies 56
Emergency Adjustments ... 60


Your
NEW CHEVROLET
Incorporates in its design the latest and best
engineering developments. It is built to the
highest manufacturing standards, and only the
best materials are used in its construction.
The purpose of this handbook is to assist you
in obtaining the greatest amount of pleasure
and satisfaction from your car. To insure this
it is only necessary to see that it is operated
with consideration and that it receives reason-
able care.
First Edition
ISSUED SEPTEMBER, 1941
GENERAL MOTORS-HOLDEN S LTD


CHEVROLET SPECIFICATIONS AND LICENCE DATA
Wheelbase 116 in.
Tyre Size ... : 16 x 6.00 inches.
Number of Cylinders 6
Bore - 3\ in.
Stroke 3f in.
Piston Displacement ... ... ... 216.5 cubic inches
Horsepower (R.A.C. or S.A.E.
Rating) - 29.4
Horsepower (Actual) ... ... ... 85 at 3200 r.p.m.
Firing Order 1-5-3-6-2-4
Battery Capacity ... ... 105 ampere
# .
CAPACITIES
Petrol Tank 15i gallons
Cooling System ... quarts
Gear Box I 4 pints
Rear Axle 3 pints
Engine Oil Capacity (Refill) 4| quarts
Engine Oil Capacity (Dry Engine) ... 5 quarts
ADJUSTMENTS
Valve Lash or Clearance —
Inlet —Hot 006 in. to .008 in.
Exhaust —Hot ... ... ... - .013 in. to .015 in.
Distributor Point Opening 018 in.
Spark Plug Gap 040 in.
Clutch Pedal Lash or Free Movement f in.—l in.
Tyre Pressure —
Front 26 lbs.
Rear ... ... ... ... ... 28 lbs.
See. Page 4 for Engine and Chassis Number Data
.' O O


CONTROLS AND INSTRUMENTS
1. Engine Hood Control Knob
2. Ignition Lock
3. Throttle Control
4. Choke Control
5. Cigarette Lighter
6. Light Switch
7. Windscreen Wiper Switch
8. Hand Brake Lever
9. Starter Button
10. Instrument Cluster
11. Ash Receiver
12. Parcel Compartment Lock


Identification Numbers —The chassis number is stamped on
the frame side member just behind left hand front wheel. The
engine number is stamped on a boss located on the right hand
side of the engine behind the ignition distributor.
CONTROLS AND INSTRUMENTS
Improvements are constantly being made in the controls and
instruments, and it is advisable for every driver to become
thoroughly familiar with them and learn how to use them most
effectively.
Keys —Right here seems the best place to say a word about the
keys that came with your car. One key fitted with a special
Tenite cover fits the ignition lock. A second is oval-shaped and
fits the parcel compartment, while a third, with a round head fits
the rear luggage compartment, and also the left front door.
Door Locks— To lock the
doors from the inside,
push down the small con-
trol button on the window
moulding of each door.
This disconnects the out-
side door handles so that
they cannot be used to
open the doors.
The door inside handles
are inoperative when the
Control Button
control button is down. This safety feature prevents the door
being inadvertently opened from the inside, as through a child
playing with, or a passenger accidentally falling against, a handle.
Without the use of a key, all doors can be locked from the
outside by pushing the control button down after the door has
been opened. Then close the door while holding the outside door
handle all the way down. Unless the outside door handle is held
in this position, the inside lock control button will return to its
unlocked position.
Caution: Be careful not to leave the key inside the car when
using this method of locking, as the only means of unlocking the
door from the outside is with a key.


Throttle Controls —Under most circumstances, the foot accel
erator is used to control the speed of
the engine. This can also be accom-
plished by using the hand throttle but-
ton on the instrument panel, which is
identified by the letter "T”. The foot
accelerator is spring controlled and
returns automatically to its closed or
normal position. The hand throttle
button is an auxiliary control for use
when it is desired to operate the en-
gine at a fixed speed above a slow idle.
Throttle Knob
It must be pressed back to the instrument panel to return the
throttle to the idling position.
Choke Control —When starting a cold engine, it is necessary
to provide a richer fuel mixture than is normally required. The
choke control button, identified by the
letter "C”, operates a valve in the car-
burettor for this purpose.
The correct use of the choke is ex-
tremely important; if improperly
handled, it may seriously affect the life
of the engine by causing unburned
fuel to leak past the pistons and dilute
the lubricating oil.
The choke should not be used if
the engine retains any heat from pre-
Choke Knob
vious running, without first attempting to start the engine with
its normal fuel mixture.
If the choke has been used excessively, causing failure to start,
proceed as follows: Continue to press the starter button and with
the choke control returned to its normal position, open the throttle
to admit more air. Approximately 15 to 20 seconds of cranking
the engine under these conditions will be sufficient to admit
enough air to overcome the overloaded fuel condition and start
the engine.


OIL PRESSURE GAUGE
This gauge on the instrument panel is an indicator only, and
merely shows whether the pump is working. The pressure shown
on the gauge does not necessarily indicate the condition or quan-
tity of oil in the crankcase.
If the gauge does not register pressure when the engine is
running, stop the engine immediately and determine the cause.
Ammeter —This instrument registers the flow of current to and
from the battery, except that taken by the starting motor. The
ammeter reading is an indication of whether the battery is receiv-
ing charging current from the generator, but does not indicate the
condition of the battery. The charging rate of the generator is
regulated by the voltage and current regulators. The voltage regu-
lator protects the battery from overcharging while the current
regulator limits the output of the generator.
The functioning of these units often causes slight fluctuations
in the ammeter hand. This fluctuation is one of the indications
that the voltage and current regulators are operating satisfactorily
and should cause no concern on the part of the car owner.
Water Temperature Indicator —The water temperature in-
dicator shows the temperature of the cooling water in the engine.
Normally, this gauge should not read over 180°. On long hills
or at sustained high speeds in hot weather, it may go slightly
Instrument Group


above this point. It will do no harm if the engine temperature
occasionally reaches 210° Fahrenheit* under extremely hot driv-
ing conditions.
An engine that consistently runs too cold will not develop
maximum power from the fuel burned and therefore is not econ-
omical. An engine that consistently runs too hot will lose power
and efficiency and in addition will have a shorter life due to the
high temperature generated within the engine. Water temperature
control of your Chevrolet is entirely automatic, so that the engine
always operates at an efficient and economical point.
Fuel Gauge —The fuel gauge indicates the amount of fuel in
the tank at the rear of the car. It operates only when the ignition
switch is turned on.
Windscreen Wiper Control —The windscreen wiper control
is of the press button type, and is located below the right hand
side of the instrument panel.
Speedometer —The speedometer is
of the circular type and is located to
the right of the Radio grille.
Just above the centre numeral is a
red headlamp beam indicator light
which automatically lights when the
headlamp beams are in the upper, or
country position. When this light is on,
it is a signal that your headlamp beams
Speedometer
are in a position which blinds the driver approaching from the
opposite direction. (See page 8.)
Headlamps —Two separate and distinct beams are provided.
1. A country (upper) beam is designed to illuminate the
road evenly for considerable distance ahead of the car.
*This is based on the fact that water boils at 212° Fahrenheit at sea level.
At higher altitudes, this figure is correspondingly lower.


This beam is for use on the
open highway when not
meeting other vehicles.
2. A traffic (lower) beam is also
provided, and is low enough
to avoid glare in the eyes of
oncoming drivers. It is in-
tended for use on heavily
travelled highways or on city
streets and should always
be used when meeting other
vehicles.
Traffic
(Lower) Beam
Country
(Upper) Beam
Lighting Control —The headlamps, parking lamps, instru-
ment lamps and ignition lock lamp are all controlled by a single
switch operated by the light button on the instrument board.
When the button is pulled out half way, all but the headlamps
are lighted. When pulled out all the way, all but the parking
lamps are lighted.
By turning the light button, the intensity of the instrument
cluster and ignition lock lighting may be varied, or the lights
turned completely off by turning the button fully to the right.
With the light button pulled out
all the way, either the country (upper)
or traffic (lower) headlamp beams
may be obtained alternately by oper-
ating the headlamp foot switch.
When the country (upper) beam
is lighted, the red beam indicator
Headlamp Foot Switch
light on the speedometer dial is illuminated, making it convenient
for the driver to determine when this beam is in use. Always use
traffic (lower) beam when meeting other vehicles.
A 30-ampere capacity fuse is located on the back of the light-
ing switch, and it is easily reached in case it requires replacement.
Trunk Compartment Lighting —When the tail lamps are
lighted, they also provide light in the trunk compartment through
a lens in the top of the tail lamp body.


LAMP
BULBS
Location
Bulb No.
C.P.
Qty. Used
Headlamps
... 2530
50-32
2
Parking Lamps
63
3
2
Tail and Stop Lamps
... 1154
3-21
2
Instrument Lights ...
55
11
1 2
1
Ignition Lock Light
51
1
1
Headlamp Beam Indicator
51
1
'f
I
Dome Lamp
...
15
, 1
Number Plate Lamp
63
D
1
Clock —Special De Luxe Models are
equipped with an illuminated stem
wind clock located to the left of the
glove compartment door. The clock
is set by turning a small knob on its
frame below the dial.
When the headlights or parking
lights are on, a light within its case
illuminates the dial.
Cigarette Lighter
Clock (Special De Luxe)
Cigarette Lighter —Both models are
equipped with a press-in-to-light type
cigarette lighter. Push the lighter all
the way in and let go. The lighter will
eject automatically and be ready for use
in eight to ten seconds.
Bonnet Lock Control —The bonnet is of the alligator jaw type,
opening at the front, and has a concealed lock under the front
end. Under the left side of the instrument panel there is a control
button (marked Hood ) which, when pulled out, releases the lock
and causes the bonnet to open one inch. This allows sufficient


room to release the safety catch under
the front end of the bonnet by pulling
the catch forward. When the bonnet
is closed, the button automatically re-
turns to the locked position. Since the
bonnet can be unlocked from inside of
the car only, this prevents tampering
Bonnet Lock Control
and theft of parts when the car is parked with doors locked.
Cowl Ventilator Control —The cowl ventilator is opened
and closed by means of the handle located under the instrument
panel immediately below the ignition switch. By pushing down
on the handle, the ventilator may be opened to one of the three
open positions provided for regulating the amount of air admitted.
Horn Ring
(Special De Luxe Models)
Horn Button Special De Luxe
models are equipped with a two-spoke
steering wheel, having a horn blowing
ring, permitting sounding of the horn
by a finger touch without removing
the hand from the steering wheel.
The horn button on Ridemaster
models is located in the centre of the
steering wheel.
Vacuum Gear Shift —A remote control type of vacuum gear
shift which utilizes both manual control and vacuum power to
accomplish the change in gears is standard on both models.
Movement of the gear shift lever,
mounted on the steering column
below the steering wheel, requires
only a very small percentage of the
effort necessary to shift gears with
the conventional gear shift lever.
This makes it possible for the driver
to shift gears safely and conveniently
Gear Shifting
without removing the hand from the steering wheel. The vacuum
gear shift lever may be placed in any one of five positions
neutral, reverse, first, second or third. The movement of the lever
is the same as that of the conventional floorboard lever, except
that it moves in a vertical plane instead of a horizontal plane.


The operation of the lever in engaging the gears consecutively
is as follows: —
1. See that gear shift lever is in neutral position (lever may
be moved up and down).
2. First speed —with clutch pedal depressed, raise lever and
pull toward the rear of the car until it is fully engaged in first
speed location; then gradually release clutch pedal.
3. Second speed —with clutch pedal depressed, push lever
toward the front of car. Lever will cross through neutral position
and engage second speed position. Release clutch pedal.
4. Third speed —with clutch pedal depressed, pull lever
toward the rear of the car until lever has reached the end of the
travel into third speed position.
5. Reverse —with car at a standstill, depress clutch pedal, raise
lever, and push forward.
REVERSE
Depress clutch pedal, move lever UP
toward wheel, then forward.
SECOND
Depress clutch pedal, move lever FOR
WARD to neutral. Down from the
wheel, FORWARD again.
LOW
Depress clutch pedal, move lever UP
toward wheel, then back.
HIGH
Depress clutch pedal,pulllever straight
back from SECOND position.
Brakes —The increased power of modern cars has made motorists
more conscious than ever of the need for good, efficient brakes


that will assure quick, positive stopping. Your new Chevrolet is
equipped with the latest type hydraulic brakes. These brakes are
so designed that smooth quick stops can be accomplished with a
minimum of effort. The brake pedal operates the hydraulic service
brakes on all four wheels. The service brakes should ordinarily be
used in stopping the car.
The hand brake lever is located at the side of the driver's com-
partment just under the instrument panel. It operates the rear
wheel brake shoes mechanically and is normally used as a parking
brake.
Starting the Engine —Before starting the engine see that the
gearshift lever is in the neutral position.
When starting with a warm engine—
(l) Turn on the ignition switch.
(2) Pull hand throttle control but-
ton about one-third of the way.
(3) Press starter button firmly and
release when the engine starts.
(4) If engine does not start readily,
use choke sparingly. In hot weather, or
when the engine is warm, it is usually
Starter Button
possible to start with very little choking, or none at all.
When starting with a cold engine —
(1) Pull hand throttle control button about one-third of the
way out.
(2) Depress clutch pedal.
(3) Turn on ignition switch.
(4) Pull choke control button to "full out” position.
(5) Press the starter button firmly and release it when the
engine starts.
(6) Push in the choke button about half way and adjust the
hand throttle control to the position required for smooth oper-
ation during the warm-up period.
Do not pump the accelerator while starting and do not race
the engine immediately ajter starting.
Push choke control and throttle control buttons all the way in
as soon as the engine temperature will permit smooth running
with buttons in this position.


Fuels —Your car has a modern high compression engine, and
to obtain the maximum performance, efficiency and economy,
first grade fuels should be used.
The Octane Selector is provided so that by adjustment full
advantage of the benefits of these fuels can be obtained. (See
page 63 for Adjustment of Octane Selector.)
OPERATING THE CAR WHEN NEW
It is advisable to limit the driving speeds during the early oper-
ation of the car to give the closely fitted parts time to break in
smoothly and acquire the necessary highly polished surfaces essen-
tial for satisfactory performance and long life.
It is suggested that you do not drive above 35 miles an hour
for the first 300 miles, or above 45 miles per hour for the next
200 miles. During the next 500 miles slightly higher speeds may
be used. Warm the engine at slower speeds as this allows all
parts to expand uniformly to operating clearances.
If the above precautions are observed for the first 1000 miles,
short bursts of higher speed driving can then usually be resorted
to without danger to the mechanism. However, the prudent owner
will not drive his car considerable distances at extremely high
speeds until at least another 500 miles have been covered.
Care during the initial breaking-in period will be amply repaid
in lower operating costs and freedom from trouble. See remarks
on page 21 regarding changing engine oil when car is new.
USE OF THE CONTROLS
The remarks on this subject which follow, are intended primarily
for the benefit of the inexperienced owner, whose driving habits
are being formed from the moment he begins to operate his car.
They will, however, be found to contain suggestions of value even
to the driver with years of experience.
With the car standing still, learn the location, use, and rela-
tionship of the clutch and brake pedals, the accelerator pedal, and
the brake hand lever. Learn the positions of the shifting lever for
the various speeds forward and reverse. Practise releasing the
clutch and shifting gears, so that you can make shifts without
hesitation.
Take advantage of the provisions which have been made for
your comfort. Each driver eventually finds a sitting position which
suits him for driving, and your car is built to enable you to do so.


Adjust the seat so that you sit comfortably, and learn to relax
while driving.
An experienced driver should accompany the new driver in
his first attempts on the road. However, the essence of learning
to drive is trial and error. Getting the required co-ordination be-
tween eyes, hands, and feet is simply a matter of doing a few
simple things correctly, over and over again, until they become
habitual.
Steering —Turn the steering wheel far enough, but not too far.
This applies to straight running as well as when rounding curves
and making turns. Until experience is gained, round turns slowly,
moving the steering wheel only enough to follow the curve. Let the
engine pull the car around the turn —do not disengage the clutch.
Clutch —Keep in mind that there are really only two correct
positions of the clutch pedal —fully out or fully in. Make it a rule
to keep the foot off the clutch pedal except when actually shifting
gears and to allow the clutch to engage gently. "Riding the
Clutch,’’ which means to drive with the foot resting on the pedal,
is a bad practice, as the clutch may then be incompletely engaged.
It is harmful to the clutch, resulting in unnecessary and rapid
wear of the release bearing and the clutch-disc linings.
Principle of Clutch Operation —Pressing outside coins
with thumb and first finger
(as illustrated) creates suf-
ficient pressure and friction
on centre coin to prevent it
being turned between the
other two coins—this causes
the three coins to turn as a
unit. This is same principle
of operation as the disc
clutch.
Brakes —Always apply brakes as gently as possible, consistent
with stopping in time. Even in emergency stops a car can be
brought to a halt more quickly with its wheels turning than with
them locked by too heavy pressure on the brake pedal. Always
avoid severe brake applications which cause the wheels to lock
and slide the tyres.
Keep the clutch engaged until the last moment before actually
stopping —then disengage it and apply a trifle more brake pres


sure. Learn to drive so that you never need to stop abruptly. The
art of properly using the brakes is not difficult to master, and it
is one of the marks of the expert driver.
The modern hydraulic brakes with which your car is equipped
require very little attention. However, it is so important to keep
the brakes in good operating order that they should be inspected
at regular intervals and any necessary minor adjustments made.
With brakes that are in good order there
is a noticeable retarding effect when pedal
has travelled one-third of the distance to
the floor. As the linings wear, the amount
of brake pedal travel will increase.
If the pedal action feels soft or spongy,
or the pedal travels nearly to the floor,
immediate attention should be given to
the brakes by an experienced mechanic.
Do not permit the addition of any fluid
to the master cylinder other than the
genuine brake fluid recommended by your
Chevrolet Dealer. Inferior fluids may con-
Coast ta a gradual stop.
Sudden stops, like sudden
starts, are wasteful of petrol
and wear tyres unnecessarily
tain mineral oil which will swell and destroy the rubber parts in
the braking system. If this occurs, there is danger of a brake
failure at a critical time which could be responsible for a serious
accident and it will be necessary to replace all rubber parts, clean
the system thoroughly and refill with genuine brake fluid.
In the interests of safety, brakes should be inspected and ad-
justed at intervals of not more than ten thousand miles and pre-
ferably at 5000-mile intervals.
IMPORTANT: The correct brake fluid is essential to
satisfactory brake performance. Maintain the proper
level in the master cylinder, and replenish only with
genuine NASCO Hydra ulic Brake Fluid as
recommended by General Motors-Holden's Ltd.
Instruments —Finally, the new driver should cultivate the
habit of glancing at the instruments on the panel and interpreting
the story they tell. Oil pressure, water temperature, and electrical
readings are all useful to indicate normal engine operation or
otherwise. Deviations from the normal should be investigated and
the causes corrected.


PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE PLAN - PASSENGER CARS and TRUCKS
Operation No. 1—General Inspection, Adjustment and Lubrication—Every 1000 Miles
VAirU Mrk Service Station Order No
Date
FWr I Tcj»r Vehicle Registration No
Address Engine No — -
Driver Mileage
OCIVU.C
NOTICE: No Work other than that listed hereon is to be performed without specific authorization.
✓—IF O.K X—ADJUSTMENTS MADF
O—REPAIRS
DESIRABLE.
1. LUBRICATE CAR—(BY EXPERIENCED MAN) ... ..
... ...
...
...
2. CHANGE ENGINE OIL—(if ordered) Engine Hoc ...‘
...
...
*—
3. CLEAN AIR CLEANER —(Fill oil bath type to proper level with S.A E 50 OIL)
-
4. CHECK STEERING GEAR oil level Add lubricant if necessary
...
-
-
5. INSPECT WATER PUMP and HOSE CONNECTIONS CHECK RADIATOR for leaks
~
—
6. INSPECT FAN BELT adjustment and WATER PUMP BEARINGS
~
-
~ —
7. CHECK all LIGHTS and HORN
-
-
• —
8. INSPECT BATTERY and fill to proper level
...
-
-
9. CHECK CLUTCH PEDAL adjustment
-
...
-
10. CHECK to see if PETROL GAUGE is recording
-
-
-
11. CHECK REAR VIEW MIRROR -
-
~
12. CHECK STARTER to see if it operates properly
~
-
~
13. CHECK CHOKE and set CARBURETTOR for proper idling speed
—
...
-
14. CHECK WINDSHIELD WIPER -
-
• -
- -
15. CHECK to see if OIL PRESSURE is up to standard
-
-
16. CHECK GENERATOR charging rate and adjust if necessary
-
-
-
17. CHECK STEERING GEAR for adjustment
-
...
-
18. INSPECT for SPRING SHACKLE adjustment
-
...
19. CHECK FRONT WHEEL BEARINGS for ad|ustment
—
20. CHECK TYRE AIR PRESSURE and inflate as recommended
...
21. CHECK TRANSMISSION oil level Add lubricant if necessary. Extra charge for lubricanc
...
22. FILL UNIVERSAL JOINTS. (Chevrolet Truck) - _
•••
23. CHECK DIFFERENTIAL oil level. Add lubricanr if necessary. Extra charge for lubricant (Hypoid) ...
24. CHECK FRONT INDEPENDENT SUSPENSION (Cars)
...
-
25. CHECK REAR WHEEL BEARINGS for adjustment. (Chevrolet Trucks)
...
-
26. TEST EMERGENCY and SERVICE BRAKES during road test
...
...
27. CHECK reading of HEAT INDICATOR
-
28. INDICATE condition of FENDERS BODY
...
PAINT TRANSFERS AND SIGNS
This Inspection indicates that the following Repairs are
desirable.
Estimated Cost
Description of Suggested Repairs
Parts
Labour
Total
ALL ADJUSTMENTS ACCORDING TO SERVICE MANUAL
Service Manager
PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE FORM-1000 MILES
GENERAL MOTORS - HOLDEN'S LIMITED


PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE PLAN - PASSENGER CARS and TRUCKS
Operation No. 2—General Inspection, Adjustment and Lubrication—Every 5000 Miles
Vehicle No ‘ Service Station Order No Date _
Service Station Address
NOTICE: t No Work other than that listed hereon is to be performed without specific authorization.
v—IF O K. * X—ADJUSTMENTS MADE O—REPAIRS DESIRABLE
A—TUNE ENGINE —Which includes the following
Inspection and Adjustments.
3. CHECK FRONT'WHEEL BEARINGS* (Remove—clean
and inspect. Lubricate —see Lubrication Chart) _ _
4. TIGHTEN RADIATOR and FRONT FENDER SUP-
PORT BOLTS* _______
5. TIGHTEN FRONT WHEEL HUB BOLTS _ -
6. TIGHTEN FRONT BUMPER BOLTS _ „ _
7. TIGHTEN FRONT ENGINE SUPPORT* BOLTS -
8. CHECK KING PINS* ______
9. CHECK FRONT SUSPENSION and RADIUS RODS
for looseness* _ _
10. ON I BEAM AXLE vehicle—INSPECT AND TIGHTEN
FRONT SPRINGS—SHACKLES* and U BOLTS _
11. TIGHTEN ENGINE REAR MOUNTINGS* _ _
12. TIGHTEN RUNNING BOARD BOLTS _
13. TIGHTEN FRONT FLOOR BOARDS _
14. ADJUST BODY or CAB HOLD DOWN BOLTS -
15. TIGHTEN UNIVERSAL JOINT* BALL CAP BOLTS.
(ADJUST IF NECESSARY) _____
16. TIGHTEN REAR FENDER BOLTS ______
17. TIGHTEN REAR WHEEL AXLE NUTS and HUB
BOLTS _________ v^_
18. TIGHTEN MUFFLER SUPPORT BOLTS* _ _ __
19. TIGHTEN BATTERY CLAMP BOLTS* _ _ _
20. CHECK and ADJUST REAR SPRING SHACKLES and
TIGHTEN REAR SPRING U BOLTS _ _ _
21. CHECK REAR VIEW MIRROR* _
22. CHECK operation of WINDOW REGULATORS and
DOOR LOCKS* ___ ______
23. CHECK TYRE air pressures and inflate as recommended.
Adjust front wheel toe-in ______
24. TEST EMERGENCY* and SERVICE BRAKE* adjust-
ment during road test ______
1. CHECK, CLEAN, and adjust SPARK PLUGS* ... -
2. CHECK, SQUARE, LUBRICATE AND SET DISTRI-
BUTOR POINTS.* FILL DISTRIBUTOR SHAFT
GREASE CUP -
3. CHECK and CLEAN DISTRIBUTOR CAP
4. INSPECT IGNITION WIRING* and seat wires in coil
and cap securely _ _ ... -
5. SET OCTANE SELECTOR AT 0° - -
6. CLEAN sediment bulb on FUEL PUMP* ... _ ._
TIGHTEN FUEL PUMP lines. (FUEL PUMP should be
overhauled every 15,000 miles at extra charge) _ _
8. CHECK WATER PUMP BEARINGS*
9. TIGHTEN HOSE CONNECTIONS* and CHECK
RADIATOR for leaks _
10. CHECK and ADJUST FAN BELT* ... ...
11. CLEAN and service AIR CLEANER —(Fill oil bath type
to proper level with S.A.E. 50 OIL) .„ ... ... _ —
(CHECK CRANKCASE VENTILATOR)
12. INSPECT CARBURETTOR and set float level and choke
adjustment ... - - - - -
13. ADJUST METERING ROD* setting by using metering
rod gauge (CHECK ANTI-PERCOLATOR*) - ....-
14. CHECK STARTER - -
The following operations should be performed with
engine hot and running:—
15. TIGHTEN CYLINDER HEAD BOLTS _ _ ...
16. TIGHTEN MANIFOLD BOLTS and EXHAUST PACK-
ING* NUTS ________
17 CHECK MANIFOLD HEAT CONTROL -
18. SET ENGINE IGNITION TIMING ... .. -
19. ADJUST VALVE TAPPETS HOT—engine should be
hot and running -------
20. ADJUST CARBURETTOR. Use VACUUM GAUGE
when possible. Adjust for proper idling speed ... _
21. CHECK and ADJUST CLUTCH* PEDAL for proper
clearance ... ... ~ ~ - ——
22. CHECK reading of HEAT INDICATOR* _
23. CHECK to see if OIL PRESSURE is up to standard _
24. CHECK GENERATOR* and adjust charging rate -
25. CHECK WINDSHIELD WIPER -
26. CHECK to see if PETROL GAUGE IS RECORDING*
27. CHECK MANUAL CHOKE ... _
28. CHECK ALL LIGHTS* not include focusing)
C—GENERAL LUBRICATION— Which includes the
following Inspections.
EXTRA CHARGE FOR LUBRICANT ADDED.
1. LUBRICATE CAR—
2. CHANGE ENGINE
3. LUBRICATE FRON1
4. CHECK and All
to proper level. (Cha
5. LUBRICATE REAR
Truck—10,000 miles
6. LUBRICATE all DO
BUMPERS, LOCKS
7. CHECK and fill STC
TirUTEXT TCDUIM
(BY EXPERIENCED MAN) _ __
OIL—(if ordered) Engine Hot _
f SUSPENSION UNIT _ _ __
EMISSION and DIFFERENTIAL
nge every 10,000 miles) _ _
WHEEL BEARINGS* (Chevrolet
at extra charge) _ _ _
OR and TRUNK HINGES,
ind HANDLES ______
)RAGE BATTERY. INSPECT and
\LS „ _ _ _ _ ___
iSTER CYLINDER for fluid level.
f _____ —
VERS SHOULD BE LUBRICATED
extra charge _ _ _ _
TRS SHOULD BE LUBRICATED ,
extra charge _ _ _ _
D—GENERAL TIGHTEN-UP — Which includes the
following Inspection and Adjustments.
Hun 1L1N 1 EKMliNi
8. CHECK BRAKE M/
Add fluid if necessary
9 FRONT SPRING CO
1. CHECK and ADJUST STEERING GEAR ...
2. CHECK and ADJUST DRAG LINK and FRONT AXLE
TIE ROD CONNECTIONS* and PITMAN ARM
each 10,000 miles at
10. REAR SPRING CO\
each 10,000 miles at
This Inspection indicates that the following Repairs are desirable.
Description of Suggested Repairs
Parts
Estimated Cos
Labour
t
Total
(
"‘Replace Parts if necessary. — — --
Service Manager.
ALL ADJUSTMENTS ACCORDING TO SERVICE MANUAL
PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE FORM-5000 MILES
GENERAL MOTORS - HOLDEN S LIMITED


PROPER CARE OF THE CAR
Although you take the dependability of your car for granted,
you should become familiar with the various items of inspection
and adjustment which are needed to maintain it in the best pos-
sible operating condition.
It is far less expensive to take care of these items at stated and
regular intervals than to operate the car without attention until
the need for an expensive repair develops. In addition, this type
of preventive maintenance decreases operating costs, keeps the
car performing as it should, and assures attention to the mech-
anical details upon which safety in driving depends.
The amount of maintenance your car will require cannot, of
course, be translated exactly into terms of time or mileage covered.
It will vary according to the nature of the territory travelled, the
type of service in which the car is used, the skill of the driver, the
age of the car (expressed mileage-wise), and the kind of fuel
and lubricants used. The last named item, including engine oil,
is very important.
The following information will assist you to give your car
the attention it needs for the greatest return to you in safety,
economy, satisfactory performance and long life.
I. First 1000 Miles (and again at 2000 Miles)
Take your car back to your Chevrolet Dealer, and have
the free inspections and adjustments provided in your
G.M.-H. Service Policy.
II. Every 1000 Miles thereafter
Lubricate chassis.
Check storage battery.
Check transmission and differential to insure oil being at the
proper level.
Check condition of Engine Oil.
III. Every 2000-3000 Miles
Change Engine Oil (see page 21).
S¥. Every 5000 Miles
Have general tightening up of car.
Have motor tune-up.
Check brakes and adjust if necessary.


You can depend on skilled, reliable service from your Chev-
rolet Dealer, who has trained mechanics, Factory approved tools
and machinery, and genuine parts, and who offers service at the
lowest rates consistent with quality workmanship.
You, as a car owner, are most interested in operating your
car at the least possible cost. Recognizing this, we have made
available through your authorized Chevrolet Dealer a preventive
maintenance service to help you (see pages 16 and 17).
The inspections and adjustments made at regular intervals of
1000 and 5000 mile periods will be performed at a nominal
charge and repay you many times in maintaining your car in good
order.
LUBRICATION
Proper lubrication is the most important single item in the
maintenance of your car. Lubricants are less expensive than repair
bills, but to do their work satisfactorily they must be of the right
quality and grade for the purpose and for the season,
IMPORTANT
Follow the recommendations given in this book and
on the Lubrication Chart for best results.
Engine Lubrication — The
oil which is used to lubricate
the engine is carried in a reser-
voir formed by the oil pan at-
tached to the bottom of the
crankcase. The oil level is
checked by means of a dipper
stick, and is drained from the
crankcase by removing the
drain plug in the oil pan. It is
a good plan to have the oil
level inspected every time fuel
Check crankcase oil frequently and
keep to correct level.
is put into the tank and to have oil of proper grade and quality
added as necessary to maintain the level at or near the ''full” (or
upper) mark on the dipper stick. DO NOT OVERFILL AND
DO NOT LET THE LEVEL FALL BELOW THE LOW LEVEL
MARK ON THE DIPPER STICK.


The "low” level mark on the dipper stick does not indicate
an empty sump —it acts as a safeguard against allowing the oil
to drop to a point which would spell danger to the engine. Two
and one-half pints of oil is required to bring the level from the
low to the "full” mark.
Engine Oil —The erroneous impression still exists in some
localities that the heavier the engine oil the better it will lubricate.
Exhaustive research over a period of years has proved conclusively
that a heavier grade of lubricating oil than recommended by the
manufacturer is definitely harmful to the engine for the following
reasons: —
A. Heavier oils do not reach the working parts as quickly when the
engine is first started and this may cause premature and rapid wear.
B. After starting, heavier oils do not lubricate closely fitted parts as
well as the light oils recommended, which also is a factor in engine
wear.
C. Heavier oils increase internal engine friction, thereby resulting in
higher fuel consumption and loss of power.
D. Heavier oils are responsible for hard starting troubles during cold
weather.
E. The lighter oils now recommended aid the engine in running cooler
during warm weather operation.
It is advisable to protect the engine in your car by using at all
times the exact grade of lubricating oil specified in this book. Pur-
chase a good quality of the correct factory recommended grade of
engine oil.
Grades of Engine Oil —Some oils are "thick” (heavy-bodied)
others are "thin” (light-bodied). In order to avoid the unsatisfac-
tory classification of engine oils only as 'light, medium or heavy”
grades, some years ago a method was adopted to identify oils by
S.A.E. numbers (Society of Automotive Engineers). These num-
bers refer only to the thickness or body of the oil and in no way
apply to the quality or other characteristics. Lubricants with lower
numbers are lighter, that is, thinner than those with higher
numbers.
The following recommendations are in accordance with the
o r
above-mentioned S.A.E. numbers and for satisfactory engine oper-
ation these recommendations should be strictly adhered to. The
S.A.E. numbering system has been adopted by practically all oil
companies and no difficulty should be encountered in obtaining the
proper grade of oil in accordance with these recommendations.


Engine Oil Recommendations —The engine oil should be
changed at the end of the first 300 miles and again at 1000 and
2000 miles when the free inspections and adjustments are made.
Thereafter, changes should be made according to the instructions
given below. "Break-in” oils or special compounds are entirely
unnecessary. Likewise it is unnecessary to add any lubricant to
the petrol.
S.A.E. 20 oil will provide satisfactory "year around” service
and will permit better all round performance than will the
heavier bodied oils. However, where temperatures consistently
above 90° are experienced, S.A.E. 30 oil may be used. Under no
circumstances should oil heavier than S.A.E. 30 be used in the
engine.
Quality of Engine Oil —The refiner or marketer supplying
the oil is responsible for the quality of his product. The oil com-
pany’s reputation is the car owner’s best guarantee of quality.
When to Change Oil —Oils have been greatly improved,
driving conditions have changed, and improvements in engines,
such as the crankcase ventilating system, have greatly lengthened
the life of good lubricating oils. After the break-in period, how-
ever, mileage is only one of the factors governing the frequency
with which engine oils should be changed. To insure continuation
of best performance, low maintenance cost and long engine life,
it is necessary to change the crankcase oil more frequently if it
becomes contaminated with harmful foreign materials. Under
normal driving conditions, draining the crankcase and replacing
with fresh oil every 2000 to 3000 miles is recommended.
Driving over dusty roads or through dust storms introduces
abrasive material into the engine. Air cleaners decrease the amount
of dust that may enter the crankcase; however, if oil becomes con-
taminated from dust or any other cause, it should be drained
promptly regardless of the mileage it has been used, to prevent
harmful engine wear. The frequency of draining depends upon
the severity of dust or other abnormal conditions, and no definite
draining periods can be recommended except for normal driving
conditions.
Very short runs in cold weather, with long stops between runs,
do not permit thorough warming up of the engine, and water may
accumulate in the crankcase from condensation of moisture pro-
duced by the burning of the fuel. This promotes rusting and may


cause clogging of oil screens and passages. Under normal driving
conditions this water is removed by the crankcase ventilator but
if water accumulates, the crankcase should be drained as fre-
quently as necessary.
Drain the crankcase only after the engine has reached normal
operating temperature. The benefit of draining is lost, to a large
extent, if the crankcase is drained when the engine is cold, as some
of the suspended foreign matter will cling to the sides of the oil
pan and will not drain out readily with the slow moving cold oil.
Oil Consumption —In the process of engine lubrication, some
of the oil works past the piston rings into the cylinders, where it
is burned with the fuel mixture. This should not cause alarm as
it is a normal condition and is necessary for efficient lubrication of
the pistons and cylinder walls.
Just as there is a definite relationship between car speed and
fuel consumption, high speed driving exacts an added toll in the
form of increased consumption of engine oil.
The right grade of lubricating oil should always be used in the
engine. Remember that the trend is toward lighter oils rather than
High speed driving demands increased oil consumption.
the heavy-bodied oils formerly acceptable, because they are equally
efficient at average operating temperatures and more so when
cold, and for other reasons previously stated.
Do not overfill the crankcase. Overfilling not only contributes
to excessive oil consumption, but it may cause air bubbles to be
formed in the oil which may tend to prevent the lubricant from
reaching the bearings in sufficient quantities.


Transmission Lubrication —The transmission (gear box) of
your car, as you receive it, is filled with S.A.E. 90 Transmission
Lubricant, suitable for "year-around” service, and lubricant of this
same viscosity should be used when replenishing or replacing the
oil.
It is recommended that the lubricant in the transmission be
drained twice a year, or approximately every 6000 to 10,000 miles.
It is a good plan to wash out the transmission with a light oil to
remove foreign substances, such as grit or dirt. To do this, remove
the drain plug at the bottom of the transmission case and allow
the oil to drain off, after which flush out the case thoroughly, and
refill with the oil recommended above.
The lubricant level should be checked periodically and lub-
ricant added if required.
Rear Axle Lubrication —The rear axle of your car, which is
equipped with a Hypoid Gear and Pinion, is filled, as you receive
it, with "S.A.E. 90 Hypoid Lubricant’’ suitable for "year-around"
service at any speeds and loads to which the car may be subjected.
Hypoid Lubricant of this same viscosity must be used for
refills and for any additions periodically required to keep up the
lubricant level.
While seasonal changes of the lubricant are not required, it
is recommended that you have the Housing drained and refilled
with "S.A.E. 90 Hypoid Lubricant” at least twice a year, or every
6000 to 10,000 miles under severe service conditions.
Caution —Use a light flushing oil to flush out the Axle and
Gear Box Housings when draining. Do not use water, steam,
kerosene, petrol, alcohol, etc.
The lubricant level should be checked periodically and lub-
ricant added if required.
Starting Motor Lubrication —Every 1000 miles put a few
drops of light oil, or engine oil, in the oil cup.
Generator Lubrication —Every 1000 miles put a few drops of
a light oil, or engine oil, in the 2 oil cups.
Distributor Lubrication —The distributor is equipped with a
grease cup. Fill this cup with a soft, smooth cup grease and turn
down every 1000 miles.


Carburettor Accelerating Pump Lubrication —It is im-
portant that the carburettor accelerating pump countershaft be
lubricated every 5000 miles. To lubricate this shaft, remove the
screw attaching the dust cover and on Canadian models fill the
threaded hole with graphite grease. On U.S. models saturate the
felt ring with light oil or engine oil.
Brake and Clutch Pedal Lubrication —The pedals, lubri-
cated at the factory, should not require further lubrication. How-
ever, should the pedals operate "stickily,” remove the plug and
fill the reservoir with chassis lubricant.
Caution: Be very carejul no to get any lubricant on the
nearby rubber parts.
Front Wheel Lubrication —It is necessary to remove the
front wheels to lubricate the ball bearings. The bearing assemblies
should be cleaned, and packed with a high melting point front
wheel bearing grease. Do not pack the hub between the inner
and outer bearing assemblies, or the hub cap, as this excessive lub-
rication results in the grease working out into the brake drum and
linings.
In mounting the front wheels, great care must be taken to
properly adjust the bearings, an operation which requires mech-
anical skill, as follows: —
1. Using an 8 inch wrench (never larger) and applying a steady
force with one hand, pull up the adjusting nut as tightly as
possible. At the same time rotate the wheel to be sure that all
parts are correctly seated.
2. Back off the adjusting nut one-half castellation or one-twelfth
turn.
3. If the slot in the nut and the cotter pin hole line up, insert the
cotter pin. If not, back the nut off until the slot and the hole
are in line and then insert the cotter pin.
With the bearing inner cup an easy-push fit on the spindle
and the nut a free-running fit on the spindle threads, this will
give an adjustment toward the tight side, which will allow for
settling and working-in of the parts in service.
Front wheel bearings should never be set up on the loose side,
as such an adjustment does not bring the balls and races into pro-
per contact.
It is well to note that the slight friction of a new, snugly fitting
felt retainer assembly will temporarily produce a slight drag on


the wheel, but this is easily recognized and need not be confused
with adjustment of the bearing. Spin the wheel, making sure that
all parts are in correct position, then clinch cotter pin securely.
Rear Wheel Lubrication —The rear wheel bearings are lubri-
cated from the rear axle.
Spring Shackles Lubrication —The spring shackles are
equipped with pressure gun fittings, and should be lubricated with
Chassis Lubricant.
Caution: Rubber bushings are used at the front of each rear
spring, and on the spring seats. These bushings must not be lub-
ricated or sprayed with oil.
Hydraulic Brake Fluid —Use only genuine NASCO Hydraulic
Brake Fluid for the brake system of your car. This is obtainable
from all G.M.-H. Dealers.
Steering Gear Lubrication —The steering gear is filled at
the factory with a special all-season gear lubricant. Seasonal
change of this lubricant is unnecessary and the housing should not
be drained. Whenever required, additions should be made using
steering gear lubricants marketed by the major oil companies.
The pipe plug is installed at this point to prevent over-lub-
rication, generally occasioned by the use of a pressure gun.
Over-lubrication of this unit might result in forcing the lub-
ricant up the steering gear tube to the horn button and steering
wheel.
Vacuum Power Gearshift Mechanism —This mechanism,
lubricated at the factory, is well protected and should not require
further lubrication under 15,000 miles. However, should the shift-
ing become "sticky” the protecting boot should be inspected for
leaks, at which time the levers should be lubricated with a
graphite grease and the boot properly assembled.
Chassis Lubrication —Several different types of lubricants are
required to lubricate properly the various points of the chassis.
The Lubrication Diagram on page 27 shows all points which
require lubrication, the intervals at which attention is to be given,
and the kind of lubricant to be used. It should be consulted and its
recommendations followed, to be certain of proper chassis lub-
rication.


1941 PASSENGER CAR LUBRICATION
POINTS
1. Lower Control Arm —Front (2 each side) —
Chassis Lubricant ... ... ... ... ... 1000 miles
2. Lower Control Arm —Rear (1 each side) —
Chassis Lubricant ... ... ... ... ... 1000 miles
3. Upper Control Arm —Front (1 each side) —
Chassis Lubricant ... ... ... ... ... 1000 miles
4. Upper Control Arm —Rear (1 each side) —
Chassis Lubricant 1000 miles
5. Front Wheel Bearings —Check and lubricate if
necessary with High Melting Point Front
Wheel Bearing Grease 5000 miles
<6. King Pin (2 each side) —Chassis Lubricant ... 1000 miles
7. Shock Absorber —Front —Genuine Shock
Insulating Fluid - 5000 miles
8. Tie Rod (2 each side) —Chassis Lubricant ... 1000 miles
9. Steering Gear (see page 25) ... ... - 1000 miles
10. Air Cleaner (see page 65) ... 2000 miles
11. Transmission (see page 23).
12. Shock Absorber —Rear —Genuine Shock
Insulating Fluid 5000 miles
13. Rear Axle (see page 23).
14. Rear Spring Shackle —Rear (2 each side) —
Chassis Lubricant 1000 miles
15. Generator (2 oil cups) —Light Engine Oil ... 1000 miles
16. Distributor (1 cup) —Chassis Lubricant ... ... 1000 miles
17. Starting Motor (1 oil cup) —Light Engine Oil 1000 miles
18. Clutch and Brake Pedal Shaft (see page 24).
19. Vacuum Shift Cylinder (see page 25).
20. Throttle Bell Crank —Light Engine Oil 1000 miles
21. Carburettor Accelerating Pump Shaft —
Light Engine Oil (U.S. Models) ... ... 5000 miles
Graphite Grease (Can. Models) ... ... 5000 miles


Q LUBRKATE EVERY 1000 LUBRICATE EVERY 2000 MILES LUBRICATE EVERY 5000 MILES


BODY LUBRICATION
Every 1000 Miles
Bonnet Hinges and Catch Mechanism: Light machine oil..
Window Regulator: Lower window to fully opened position.
Hold a piece of wire with one end touching the shaft at the gear
end (inside the door). Apply a few drops of light machine oil to
the wire and allow it to run down to the shaft.
Window Regulator Arm: Raise the window glass to the closed
position. Using a squirt can, apply light machine oil along the
upper edge of the sash channel on the inside for its entire length.
This oil will flow down on the channel and lubricate channel,
bracket and the regulator arm knob.
Windscreen Wiper Shaft: Use light machine oil.
Door Hinge Pins: Light machine oil.
Door Lock Bolts: Use "Doorcase” on curved side. Use light
machine oil on flat side.
Lock Cylinders: Lubricate with powdered graphite.
Door Check: Use soft soap on rod. Use light machine oil on
hinge pin.
Door Dovetail Bumpers and Striker Plate: Apply "Doorcase’ to
the shoes.
Front Seat Adjuster: Use graphite lubricant on gears. Use cup
grease sparingly on seat supports.
TUNING THE ENGINE
As a general rule, few owners are as critical of the perform-
ance of their cars as they should be. The reason for this statement
is that few owners have their engines tuned to peak performance
as often as this operation is required.
Normal wear of some of its components after thousands of
miles of operation will reduce the efficiency of the engine, even
though it continues to propel the car with apparent satisfaction.
While a knife will continue to cut, after a fashion, when its keen
edge is gone, nevertheless, for effective use a knife should be
sharp; likewise, for efficiency and economy the engine should be
tuned regularly. Tuning an engine is not difficult or expensive
when the proper equipment, skill and knowledge are available.
In brief, it consists of a series of adjustments to the ignition sys-
tem, the fuel system and the valves, to adjust them to the various
dimensions and clearances specified by the car manufacturer.


Vital points requiring this periodic inspection and adjustment
are the spark plugs, distributor, ignition timing, battery, carburet-
tor, air cleaner, fuel pump and valves. When set according to the
clearances specified elsewhere in this book, they will work together
for maximum performance and economy. In view of the emphasis
placed on economical operation, it is important to understand the
real economy involved in tuning the engine at regular intervals.
Its small cost is more than repaid by savings in fuel and oil.
An engine can advantageously be tuned at least twice a year
—most conveniently when the car is put into shape seasonally for
either summer or winter driving.
BATTERY CARE AND UPKEEP
The storage battery is a vital part of the electrical system of
your car and it must receive regular and systematic attention if it
is to continue to function properly.
The first requirement is to keep all the cells of the battery
filled to the proper level. Distilled water must be added to replace
that lost by evaporation. The battery plates should always be
covered to a depth of not more than one-half inch. To maintain
this level have the battery inspected weekly and water added as
required. On very long trips, water should be added more fre-
quently if necessary.
In general, more attention should be given to the battery when
the weather is very hot or very cold than when it is moderate.
Normally, however, an inspection every week will suffice. After
water has been added, see that the filler plugs are tightly screwed
in and the top of the battery dried. Battery acid is corrosive. If any
should spill accidentally, neutralize with an alkali such as am-
monia or sal soda, and flush off with clear water.
Corrosion of the battery terminals and connections can be pre-
vented by coating with petroleum jelly or vaseline. Be sure that
the connections to the battery as well as the ground strap connec-
tion between the battery and the frame, are kept clean and tight.


Any looseness or rust at these vital points can cause the lamps to
burn out and the starter to become inoperative, and may also pre-
vent the battery from being charged.
For best results, the battery should be maintained as nearly
fully charged as possible. The specific gravity of the electrolyte is
a good indication of the condition of the battery, and this is
usually tested with a hydrometer.
Periodical hydrometer readings are advisable and this inspec-
tion will be made by the Battery Service Station.
Specific gravity of acid at various states of charge and discharge:
In New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania —
When Battery is Specific Gravity
Fully charged 1.250 (1.240 to 1.260)
Half charged or half discharged 1.180 (1.170 to 1.190)
Fully discharged 1.120 (1.110 to 1.130)
In Queensland, Western Australia and Northern Territory —
When Battery is Specific Gravity
Fully charged 1.220 (1.210 to 1.230)
Half charged or half discharged 1.150 (1.140 to 1.160)
Fully discharged 1.090 (1.080 to 1.100)
Example of Use of Tables. —The specific gravity of the acid
in a battery is found to be 1.140. From the above table it will be
found that the battery is almost fully discharged.
Batteries over half discharged should be used sparingly until,
by charging, the specific gravity is brought up to at least 1.180
in New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania,
and 1.150 in Queensland, Western Australia and the Northern
Territory.
If the car is to be laid up for the winter, take the battery to an
Authorized Battery Station for proper storage.
It is not necessary to add acid to the battery. Except in cases of
broken jar or deterioration of the sealing compound, loss of acid
does not occur. It is inadvisable for car owners to experiment with
so-called quick electrolytes for the purpose of keeping the battery
fully charged.
GENERATOR
The generator is capable of supplying sufficient current for all
the normal demands of the electrical system of the car. It is
mounted at the front of the engine and is driven by a V-belt


which also drives the water pump. The generator needs very little
care except periodic inspection and adjustment of the fan belt.
The generator charging rate is automatically determined by
a voltage regulator which in turn is controlled by the amount of
current used and the state of charge of the battery. When the bat-
tery is partially discharged, the charging rate is automatically
increased until the battery is brought back to a normal state, after
which the charging rate is automatically reduced. If, at times, the
battery charge indicator needle is observed to vibrate, this need
not be considered unusual as it is caused by the action of the
voltage regulator with a fully charged battery.
Although the generator charging rate is automatically con-
trolled and will keep the battery charged under normal circum-
stances, there are certain unusual conditions under which the bat-
tery may not remain fully charged. These are: —
1. Car used in short trip service with frequent stopping and
starting, particularly in cold weather and at night.
2. Excessive number of electrically operated accessories or
excessive use of any accessory, particularly with the engine not
running.
3. Car used infrequently.
If, for any of these reasons, the battery becomes discharged, it
will be necessary to remove it and charge it by an outside source.
COOLING SYSTEM
When all the passages in the motor block, cylinder head, and
radiator are clean, the cooling system functions efficiently as in-
tended. However, ordinary water contains compounds which
deposit as scale, and a certain amount of rust and corrosion forms
as a result of the action of the hot water on the various metals.
Also if the system is neglected, grease, dirt and small rubber
particles are circulated with the cooling water and may settle in
small passages, particularly those in the radiator, causing a de-
crease in efficiency which makes itself evident as overheating of
the engine.
Draining and Oeanieig Cooling System —To drain the
cooling system, open both drain plugs provided for this purpose.
One drain plug is located in the lower radiator fitting and the
other in the lower left side of the cylinder block at the rear.
It is advisable to drain and clean the cooling system twice
year.


Lower Radiator Fitting
Engine Drain Plug
The entire cooling system should be flushed out at regular
intervals. Flushing should be accomplished through the use of a
power flushing tool. It will be found that the systems employing
the reverse method (to flush with cleaning solvent flowing in
reverse direction to normal travel of water in cooling system) will
prove most effective.
Rust inhibitors should not be added to the coolant, as their
use may lead to damage to rubber parts of the cooling system.
STEERING AND WHEEL ALIGNMENT
The driving comfort and ease of handling found in your car
are evident at even the higher road speeds. They are largely due
to the improvements made in the design and construction of the
entire front end of the car. To maintain good performance, to
increase safety, and to reduce tyre wear to a minimum, it is advis-
able to have the steering mechanism and the alignment of wheels
and balance of tyres inspected and adjusted at least once a year
more often when roads are bad. The accuracy which was originally
built into the car will withstand considerable abuse, but the motor
car of to-day operates under unusually severe conditions. This
suggested inspection is therefore a safeguard against the effects
of long continued road shocks. Steering and wheel alignment
adjustments require the use of special gauges and tools and this
work should be performed by your authorized G.M.-H. Dealer.
TYRES AND THEIR CARE
The subject of tyres is of prime importance to every owner.
Your car and your tyres are better to-day than ever before, and
satisfactory tyre life can be expected under normal driving condi-
tions. The mileage given by all good makes of tyres depends to a


Under-inflation
Over-inflation
Improper use of brakes
This illustration shows the characteristic types of tyre tread wear associated with
three of the more common causes of excessive wear. Under-inflation causes wear
on the sides of the tread as shown by the arrows on the drawing at the left, often
accompanied by cupping and uneven wear. Over-inflation (centre) tends to cause
the rubber to wear off the centre of the tread. Improper use of the brakes is gen-
erally shown when the tread is worn through to the canvas in spots, or when there
are well-defined flat spots on the tread caused by locked wheels and sliding stops.
large extent on the way the car is driven and the roads upon which
it travels.
There is considerable variation in tyre mileage due to differ-
ences in road surfaces and average temperatures, even in localities
close to each other. Fast driving, quick grinding stops, the pres-
ence of hills, and skidding all cause rapid tyre wear.
Incorrect installation of tyres or wheels, or wheels out of bal-
ance, and misalignment in the front end of the car, are also detri-
mental to satisfactory tyre mileage. Many of these factors are
under the control of the driver.
If the centre of the tyre tread shows very little wear while the
outer edges show noticeable wear, it indicates driving on under-
inflated tyres. When tyres are under-inflated, the centre does not
carry its share of the weight,
and tyre rides on the shoulder.
Quick application of the
brakes when approaching a
stop and jerky "get-aways”
cause excessive tyre wear.
Therefore, it is obvious that it
is best to make gradual stops
and starts.
"Spare the clutch and save the tyres"
Care should always be used when parking. Scraping tyres
against the kerb will weaken side wall construction and this
invites blowouts and shortens the life of tyres.
J


Improper use of brakes
Effect of Speed and Heat
on Tyre Life —The accom-
panying chart is supplied from
records furnished by the Rub-
ber Manufacturer’s Association
(U.S.A.). It presents a com-
posite picture of the effect of
heat and high speed driving
on tyre life. From this it can
be seen that tyre wear is much
greater when driving at high
speeds. Tyres also wear faster
in summer than in winter.
Under-inflated tyre causing rim bruise
Tyre Wear Chart
Irregular Tyre Wear —A slight amount of irregular wear at
the outer segments of tyres is a normal condition and is due to the
difference in circumference between the centre of the tyre tread
and the outer edges. This normal wear causes the outer segments
to become slightly "saw-toothed” in appearance.
Either under-inflation or improper toe-in, or both, will ex-
aggerate this "saw-toothed” wear.
If irregular wear extends well toward the centre of the tread,
it may be due to other misalignment conditions which should be
corrected.


Normal tyre wear may be re-
duced to a minimum by "switch-
ing” wheels (without dismounting
tyres) including "spare,” as indi-
cated in illustration, approxi-
mately every 4000 miles.
This will prevent undue wear
on any particular tyre since each
of them is used at each location
equally. (When the "spare” tyre
is not used until the other tyres
are worn out, it may appear to be
new, but it will actually have de-
teriorated through disuse.)
When it comes time to make the fifth change, all of the tyres
will have run the same distance on each wheel. If tyres were
switched every 4000 miles, the car will have gone 20,000 miles,
but mileage on each tyre will be only 16,000.
Tyre and Tube Balance —Rubber balancing pads are often
used on factory-installed tubes to provide balance of tyre and tube
assembly. These pads, while similar in appearance, should not be
confused with the ordinary puncture patch.
To maintain the original tyre and tube balance, it is necessarp
to re-install tubes in the same casings with the valve stem in line
with the balancing mark on the casing. Unbalanced wheel and
tyre assemblies will cause a "whip” in the steering.
Tyre Chains —Any of the conventional full-type non-skid tyre
chains can be used on the rear wheels. Do not use tyre chains on
the front wheels under any circumstances, as they are likely to
interfere with the steering mechanism,
CARE OF THE FINISH AND TRIM
You have read in other sections of this Manual the importance
of proper lubrication and care of the mechanism of your car. It is
equally important that you also give its finish a reasonable share
of your attention for the following reasons: —
To prolong its beauty.
To protect the value of your investment.
To increase your satisfaction and pride of ownership.


Accordingly, here are a few simple suggestions for keeping
your car well-groomed.
Chrome Plated Parts —The chrome plated parts on your car
are plated under rigid conditions of control and to definite thick-
nesses of plate to provide the ultimate in protection of parts
against corrosion.
National Automotive Service Company have available, m con-
venient containers, a "Chromium Cleaner and Polish” which will
maintain the original lustre of chromium parts.
However, dirt containing black soot, clay, iron oxide, or cal-
cium chloride, the latter being sometimes used for street cleaning
purposes, may be splashed or thrown on the plated surfaces of
your car and, if allowed to remain for any length of time, is
destructive to this finish because it causes a chemical reaction
which eats through the surface and opens it to rust. Sea-coast
locations and the corrosive atmospheres of some localities are
hazardous to chrome plate.
Much of the destructive force of these compounds can be
eliminated if plated parts are washed frequently. As a further pre-
caution, it is well to treat the plated surfaces with oil or wax.
Wax, such as is used for polishing cars, is very satisfactory. To
apply, first wash the plated surfaces with water. Then dry with a
chamois and apply the wax with a clean soft cloth. Finish by
polishing with another clean cloth. Periodic application of oil or
wax in this manner will protect the chromium plate.
Note. —Your car should not be parked under trees that exude
sap, nor under eave troughs or drains of buildings. And, if pos-
sible, avoid leaving it near manufacturing plants producing acids
or alkalis.
Removing Rust from Chromium Parts —lf these precau-
tions have not been taken and rust spots appear on the chromium
plated surfaces, steps can still be taken to greatly improve their
appearance, by scouring the affected spots with a scouring powder
of a type which would be used for cleaning porcelain. After re-
moving the rust spots in this manner, a film of wax or oil should
be applied.


Care of Body Finish —Your car is finished with the latest and
best materials and with reasonable care the finish should render
long and care-free service. Flere is an artist’s sketch of the cross
section of how the finish of
your car looks when it is
new. At the bottom is a steel
sheet (1), that must be pre-
served. Next comes the spec-
ially prepared under coat (2), and finally the lacquer finish (3)*
The dots represent the particles of pigment that give the finish
its colour, held together by a carrier or binder. So long as the
binder covers the pigment particles, the colour and gloss will be
retained.
Strong Sunlight —Strong sunlight is the most damaging ele-
ment to these finishes. Continued exposure gradually causes the
dulling of the surface. It is obvious that parking a car in the shade
as much as possible is a good thing to do, but, since this is not
always practicable, the car should be polished occasionally with a
good polish, such as NASCO DUCO Cleaner and Polish.
Dirt and Road Film —Keeping your car clean is good from
every standpoint. Frequent dusting and washing pay good divi-
dends in the maintenance of car appearance and value. When
washing a car, it is advisable to use a sponge and plenty of clean
soft water, being careful not to scratch finish with dirt or gravel
which may be on the car. Dry to a high lustre with clean chamois.
Tree Sap —Sap will deposit on the finish of cars allowed to
stand under trees for any length of time. This deposit will be in
the form of numerous spots approximately the size of a pin point
which on first examination have the appearance of rust spots
developed below the finish. Sap deposits can be removed by
sponging off the spot with clear soft water.
Waxing —For the car that is chauffeur driven and the oppor-
tunity given for regular applications, waxing can be recommended.
It is advisable to wax the lacquered parts when new and every
three or four months thereafter, as a wax coating prevents weath-
ering effects. There are various waxing processes on the market,
all of which require definite methods of application. We suggest
you consult your Dealer.


When removing dust accumulations use a soft cloth, wiping
rather than rubbing the surface in order to avoid scratching the
finish. This lessens the necessity for more frequent washing of car.
Tar- -Tar is often used on roads and occasionally gets splashed
on the car. It can usually be removed with petrol when fresh.
However, if allowed to remain on the car for any length of time,
it is well to use a commercial tar remover.
Dents and Scratches —Even the most expert of drivers occa-
sionally finds that dents and scratches will appear to mar the
fine finish of his car. Fortunately, the skill of an experienced body
repair man makes it possible to treat such blemishes on the body
finish as of minor consequence. In fact, even serious damage to the
sheet metal of the chassis and body can be remedied by methods
which have been developed for bringing back the proper contours
and restoring the lacquered and enamelled surfaces.
Such repairs when properly made are invisible. By the use of
special equipment, the metal is bumped out, then filed and sanded
smooth. When necessary, holes are filled with solder and welds
are made. When the bare metal is again smooth as it was origin-
ally, a hard, quick-drying lacquer is applied with a spray-gun,
matching the original paintwork. The results are often astonishing.
Body Mountings —Body mounting bolts should be inspected
periodically by your Dealer and properly adjusted.
Door Lubrication— A small amount of lubricant applied once a
month to door locks, striker plates, hinges, door-check pins and
dovetail bumpers will be found helpful in preventing noise. Wax-
type lubricants are useful for certain purposes, since they do not
accumulate dust and dirt as does oil or grease. See page 28 for
specific details.
Cleaning Leather Upholstery —Leather should be cleaned
by using lukewarm water and a neutral soap. No harsh or alkali
soap should be used, neither should hot water, furniture polish,
wax or oils be used. One of the least desirable products to use on
this leather is any kind of saddle soap.
The periodical application of NASCO Leather Cleaner and
Preservative will remove dirt, grease, etc., and at the same time,
form a protection to the leather by filling the pores, keeping it


pliable and dustproof. Brisk rubbing with a soft, dry cloth will
then produce a highly polished surface, keeping the leather look-
ing like new.
General Instructions for Removing Stains
1. Use clean cloths and be sure clean portions of the cloth are
used throughout any operation.
2. A neutral (non-alkaline) soap should be used whenever soap
suds are applied.
3. Avoid using hot water, except when instructions call for it,
and then it should be wiped off immediately before it has a
chance to run.
4. Do not use any petrol as cleaning solvent, which is coloured
or contains tetraethyl lead.
5. Do not use bleaches or reducing agents. Follow specific in-
structions carefully.
6. Most cleaning solvents, except carbon tetrachloride solutions
and chloroform, are inflammable and care should be taken in
handling them. Chloroform should be used carefully and in
small quantities so that vapours are not inhaled.
BODY VENTILATION
Any desired amount of
ventilation can be obtain-
ed in closed body models
by means of the Holden
No - Draft ventilation
system.
The forward sections
of the front door windows
are pivoted at the top and
bottom to form Venti-
panes, which are controlled by regulator handles and can be
adjusted individually to any desired position. In addition, certain
body models have adjustable Ventipanes in the rear quarter
windows.
A few of the more common uses to which this ventilation
system can be put are: —


Cooling car in hot weather: —By turning the Ventipanes com-
pletely around, air can be scooped into the body. At the same
time, the rear windows can be closed if desired, to eliminate dust.
Preventing Clouding: —Adjusting the Ventipanes to the pro-
per angle deflects sufficient air against windscreen to maintain
outside air temperature on the inside of the windscreen glass thus
preventing "clouding.” With the Ventipanes in this position, rain
or snow is deflected away from the Ventipane openings and the
driver and passengers are not exposed as they are in ordinary cars
when the windows are lowered.
Preventing Drafts: —Adjusting the Ventipanes to the proper
angle prevents the air from flowing in directly to the rear of the
car, but causes it to be deflected against the windscreen and instru-
ment panel so that it is diffused throughout the car. The rear
section of both front door windows and the entire rear door win-
dows can be raised or lowered in the conventional manner by
means of a convenient regulator, as required.
Cowl Ventilator— A cowl ventilator is provided in addition to
the No-Draft Ventilators. This is controlled by a lever which
protrudes from beneath the instrument panel.
Genuine G.M.-H. Parts —General Motors, as the manufac-
turer of your car, recognises its obligation to you in respect to
spare parts. This applies not only to the larger parts, such as
wheels, or cylinder blocks, but also to those equally important
fan belts, spark plugs, gaskets, brake linings and piston rings.
The National Automotive Service Company, (a division
of General Motors —Holden’s Limited) is set up to distribute
Genuine G.M.-H. Parts, and this company has Authorized Dealers
throughout the Commonwealth from whom you can obtain new
parts as required.
Your G.M.-H. Dealer also holds the representation for
NASCO Parts and Accessories.
Genuine G.M.-H. Parts are manufactured to the high stan-
dards of quality established for General Motors cars —to the same
dimensions and of the same materials as the original parts on
your car. They are, therefore, dependable, and it is definitely to
your interest to specify them.


"AIR CHIEF" CAR RADIO
"Air Chief" is the finest car radio on the Australian market
and undoubtedly is the most suitable for installation in your
Chevrolet. It is a truly remarkable set, specially developed for car
installation and giving performance equal to the best home model
radio sets.
Faithful tone reproduction —quiet in operation, ample volume
and long distance reception, are features which make "Air Chief"
so desirable to complete your motoring enjoyment.
All the necessary fittings to complete the proper installation
are furnished with the set.
PERFORMANCE-ECONOMY-SAFETY
All motorists have watched with interest the progress which has
been made in improving the performance of motor cars without
proportionately increasing the operating cost for fuel, oil, tyres,
and maintenance. Driven at the same speeds as the cars of only a
few years ago, your new car can actually out-match them for
economy. Since, however, to-day’s cars are driven faster and will
get away more quickly from a standing start, the economy factor
is sometimes overlooked by the operator in an attempt to get
better performance.
Those drivers who want performance with economy can pro-
fitably spend some time in analyzing their own driving habits to
determine if any improvements in them can be made which will
result in lower operating costs. Often, without affecting the per-
formance of the car, worthwhile savings can be made.
Fuel Consumption —Tests made on a number of cars under
average driving conditions to determine the influence of speed and
driving habits on fuel consumption show some interesting results.
The following chart data indicates how the normal economy of
a light car giving 28 miles per Imperial gallon at 20 miles per
hour will decrease with increased car speed. The figures do not
necessarily apply to your car and are simply used to exemplify the
relationship between car speeds and fuel consumption.


Constant Speed Tests (Throttle Fixed in One Position)
Car Speed Fuel Consumption (Miles
(Miles per Hour) per Imperial Gallon)
20 28
30 26
40 23.3
50 21.2
60 18.6
70 14.9
The above results were obtained from tests run at constant
driving speeds without stops.
The chief factors influencing fuel consumption are: high
speed, rapid acceleration, accelerating or driving too long in low
or intermediate gear when getting under way, and too frequent
changes of speed.
Fuel required to travel any given distance increases with speed.
Speed is, of course, the greatest contributor to poor fuel
economy. Air resistance increases as the square of the speed. For
instance, a car travelling at a speed of 60 miles an hour must over-
come air resistance four times as great as when travelling 30
miles an hour.


Taking the average fuel consumption over a given mileage at
a car speed of 40 miles an hour as the standard, increasing the
speed to 50 miles an hour increased the fuel consumption 9%.
At 60 miles per hour 20% more fuel was required than at 40
miles per hour. At 70 miles per hour, the increase in fuel con-
sumption was 36%.
TO OBTAIN MAXIMUM ECONOMY
1. Learn how to start the engine quickly. As long as it is being
cranked without firing, fuel is being wasted.
2. Warm up the engine slowly —do not race it.
3. Use the accelerator correctly. Depress the accelerator grad-
ually and only in proportion to speed required.
4. Avoid racing the engine while the car is not in motion.
5. Do not idle the engine for a long period of time.
6. Acceleration over 20 miles per hour in second gear accom-
plishes very little toward fast "pick-up,” but does use an excessive
amount of fuel.
7. When approaching a stop, coast toward it with the throttle
closed and clutch engaged. Apply the brakes gradually and release
the clutch just before the car stops.
8. Driving with under-inflated tyres causes excessive tyre wear
and the "drag” produced increases fuel consumption.
9. Keep the engine tuned for maximum efficiency.
10. Keep the brakes adjusted so they do not drag.
11. Be sure to use the correct grade of engine oil as specified
on page 21. Maintain oil level at or near the full” (upper) mark
on the measuring stick.
12. Keep the proper amount of cooling solution in the radiator
summer and winter. An over-heated engine loses power and
causes rapid wear of engine parts.
13. A constant car speed with a minimum use of brakes and
throttle, maintained constantly below 40 miles per hour will also
aid in increasing fuel economy.
14. Never fill the fuel tank to overflowing.
15. Have chassis lubricated systematically and at regular inter-
vals as recommended in the Lubrication Diagram, page 27.


Road Courtesy and Safety —The satisfaction and service
which the owner gets from his car depend largely on his own
ability as a driver. On the collective skill and alertness of all
drivers, furthermore, depends the safety of streets and highways
lor all those who use them. With the thought that it will prove
constructive, we present a few remarks dealing with the driver's
every day problems.
Curves and Turns —The proper way to take a curve or a turn
is to slow down while still on the straightway approaching the
curve, so that the car can be accelerated around the curve. This
procedure gives better control of steering and an actual stability
and solidity which is lacking when curves are taken too fast.
The ability to sense the safe speed for taking curves comes
with practice, but it is wise to be cautious in this matter. One
never knows what is around the curve, and the force which tends
to slew the car off the road is greater at high speeds than most of
us realise. This is called centrifugal force, and is responsible for
many mishaps. It multiplies very rapidly as car speed increases
and it can soon reach the point where it will overcome the friction
of the tyres on the road and possibly cause the driver to lose con-
trol of the car. The careful driver will try to take curves as they
should be taken —from a slow start, accelerating around the bend.
Begin to accelerate here.
Slow here.


Poor Visibility —Driving in daylight is one thing —driving at
night or through rain, mist or fog is quite another. When visibility
is poor, most drivers do the instinctive thing —they slow down or
stop. One big point is in recognizing when visibility is poor, as it
is every night and when it is raining, as well as during spells of
fog or mist. The other is in being able to stop completely, with a
safe margin, after an obstacle has become visible.
Keep in mind that stopping involves four conditions: first,
thinking about stopping; second, moving the foot to the brake
pedal; third, applying the required pressure to the brake pedal;
fourth, the time actually required to bring the car to a stop after
pressure is applied to the brake pedal.
With brakes in good order and favourable road conditions,
the average driver requires approximately 40 feet to stop from 20
miles per hour. At higher road speeds, the stopping distance is
correspondingly greater. The speed which is safe at night, there-
fore, is that which permits stopping within the distance which
the headlamps will illuminate. Another factor to consider is that
when driving down grade a longer period of time is required to
stop at any given speed than when driving on the level at the
same car speed.
Furthermore, when visibility is poor, it is just as essential to
be seen as to see —which fact cautions that tail lamps are an
important item of equipment and should be kept in good order.
When passing oncoming cars at night, the glare of headlamps
in the eyes is avoided by watching the side of the road rather than
the approaching cars. At the same time, safety requires that you
switch your own headlamps to the passing beam whenever an-
other car comes into sight.
When it is necessary to drive during rain and fog at night, the
headlamp beams should be directed downward toward the road.
Here again the side of the road should be watched carefully.
When all is said and done, however, the driver’s caution and
good judgment are called into play whenever the visibility is
poor. The rule should be to proceed slowly and carefully, alertly
and with consideration.
Driving on Hills —To climb hills skilfully it is necessary to
understand one’s engine and to change gears at the right time.


Engines should not be ' flogged” up steep grades. Use the gears
to get the power, bearing in mind that the engine develops less
power at the high altitudes encountered in mountain driving. A
shift down to second gear should be made when the speed of the
car drops to approximately 20 miles per hour in high gear.
In climbing hills it is best to shift
down when car speed drops to 20
m.p.h.
Watching the side of the road
minimizes the effect of headlamp
glare and increases safety.
Having stopped or stalled on an upgrade, it is important to
know how to start uphill again. The car must be kept from rolling
backward while the clutch is being engaged. This can best be
done by using the hand brake and accelerator pedal. Having dis-
engaged the clutch and shifted into low gear, the clutch is en-
gaged, the brake released as the engine takes up the load, and the
engine speed is increased by pressure on the accelerator pedal.
Practice on slight grades will quickly give the co-ordination needed
to perform this manoeuvre successfully.
For descending steep hills, it is wise to use the same gear that
would be needed to go up them. If they are steep enough to
require ascent in second or low gear, the engine should be used as
a brake through that same gear when descending. It is safer and
it conserves the brakes.
Travelling downhill with the clutch disengaged is a dangerous
practice, particularly when there are curves in the road. It is im-
perative to keep the car under control at all times, with clutch
engaged and engine running. The unexpected may happen!


Careful drivers make it a rule never to overtake other cars on
hills, and never to get on the wrong side of the road when they
cannot see far enough ahead to be sure the road is clear.
Power, Speed and Brakes —The engineering of your car,
which provides the remarkable acceleration and fine low speed
performance in high gear, now universally demanded, has pro-
duced as a by product, the ability of the car to be driven at very
high speeds. Actually operating the car at or near the maximum
speeds of which it is capable is solely the responsibility of the
driver. Your good judgment will govern the road speeds at which
it is safe to operate the car.
"Safety first’’ is a slogan which should be borne constantly in
mind when motoring, and very particularly when driving fast.
Fast driving by a skilful driver under proper conditions of weather,
road, traffic, visibility, etc., etc., need not necessarily be dangerous.
It is always dangerous, however, the driver is
An earmark of the skilled driver is that he knows when —or better
said, when not —to drive fast, and when conditions allow him to
drive fast he exercises every precaution and every courtesy for his
own safety and that of others.
The car which can travel at eighty or more miles per hour
will not be compelled to strain when travelling at forty-five miles
an hour. It is more dependable and durable; it can be driven at
sensible speeds hour after hour, day after day, without being
overworked.


It has, in short, a reserve of power and speed upon which the
driver can draw. That reserve can be used wisely or otherwise,
and this point can be decided only by the driver, not by the
manufacturer.
Statistics show that approximately one car out of every three
on the streets and highways has brakes which are in need of atten-
tion. Your modern brakes are powerful and dependable, but they
should be inspected periodically and adjusted when necessary.
A good indication of the need for adjustment is the distance
the pedal must travel to bring the car to a halt. When it is neces-
sary to depress it nearly to the floor, the brakes urgently require
attention.
Wet and Slippery Pavements —When the road is slippery,
the driver is apt to experience trouble, both when starting and
stopping, especially the latter. Lack of traction is the cause and
the driver who takes this into account can usually overcome all
but the very worst conditions of this kind.
Cars can be started quite easily in high gear on slippery streets.
The clutch must be engaged very slowly and gently, the car mov-
ing off with the minimum of power applied to the wheels. This
procedure helps to prevent spinning wheels and side-slipping.
Over-acceleration is particularly to be avoided. To increase trac-
tion in slippery weather, tyre chains may be used on the rear
wheels.
When stopping on slippery surfaces, do not brake sharply.
The tyres will simply slide along, and there will be loss of steering
control and risk of a serious skid. Instead, begin to slow down at
five or six times the usual distance. Press the brake pedal lightly
and momentarily, releasing it almost at once. Apply pressure
again, lightly at first, and release it quickly. A series of these brief
pressures will slow down the car, and usually enable the driver to
stop without skidding at all. A greater measure of control is
obtained by shifting down to second or first gear, when this can
be done safely.
Allowing the clutch to remain engaged until forward move-
ment has practically stopped is extremely important on slippery
surfaces. While it is easy to stall the engine by so doing, it reduces
the tendency to skid.


The remarks made previously about the proper method of
rounding corners and taking curves are vitally important in slip-
pery weather, when traction is often cut down until it nearly
vanishes. Go into the curve or turn as slowly as possible.
Skids are better prevented than cured —therefore car speeds
should be drastically reduced in slippery weather, and more than
ordinary caution exercised. Experienced drivers resist the impulse
to disengage the clutch and apply the brakes if, in spite of pre-
cautions, they find themselves involved in a skid. Steer decisively
Use brakes properly and avoid dangerous skids
but not roughly in the direction the rear wheels are sliding and at
the same time take the foot off the accelerator gradually, striving
to regain control before the front wheels are also involved in the
skid.
Position on the Road —Safety on <the highways would be
greatly improved if all drivers understood and were guided by the
requirements of correct position on the road. The good driver
observes the following fundamentals of road courtesy and safety:
1. He remains on his own side of the road and in his own traffic
lane until his examination of the situation ahead and behind
tells him that it is safe to leave it.


2. If he intends to proceed straight ahead or to stop, he drives
close to the edge of the road on his own side.
3. If he intends to turn to right or left, he takes his position ac-
cordingly on his own side of the road, so that he will not cut
across traffic proceeding in the same direction when he makes
the turn.
4. He will make his intentions known to other motorists by sig-
nalling in an approved and easily understood manner.
This diagram shows the correct positron on the road for a left turn and a right turn
respectively, when the rule of the road is toward the left. The principles of "position
on the road" are applicable everywhere.


CITY PARKING
Most motorists are able to do a
pretty good job of steering when
the car is moving in a forward
direction, but reversing bothers
a good many of us —particularly
that very special kind of backing we must do when we park in a
short space at the kerb.
This is a point where the difference between an ordinary
driver and an expert becomes especially noticeable. It’s surprising
how few drivers are able to park their cars close to the kerb in a
short space without a lot of extra manoeuvring.
This lack of expertness in parking accounts, perhaps, for the
many new cars we see on the streets that have been scratched
and nicked before they have really been broken in.
So, we thought it would be worthwhile, not necessarily from
your viewpoint, but from the viewpoint of other members of your
family who may not have had much experience in driving, to
include detailed instructions on how to park in a small space.
This is done on the following page: —


1 Drive up and stop
level with the car in
front. (Most trouble in
parking comes from a
wrong beginning, from
not pulling ahead far
enough.)
2 Turn the wheels
sharply and back
the rear end of your car
toward the kerb.
3 As rear wheels near
kerb, swing the
front wheels so as to bring
front of car near kerb.
(Do this while still back-
ing the car up slowly.)
4 Now pull yourself
ahead into park-
ing position.


Signals and Warnings —Concern for his own safety should
make the driver of a motor car heed the signals and warnings
which are given him many times in the course of even the shortest
trip in town or country.
They may be given by signposts or traffic lights, by hand sig-
nal or the note of a horn. They may be welcome at certain times,
annoying at others. Nevertheless, the well-trained driver will
accept them for what they are —guides to his safe progress —and
will act accordingly. He will further recognise his own respon-
sibility in the same manner —that of providing notification of his
intentions, intelligibly and at the proper time.
Hand signals are not the same in all localities. However, the
car which is in the correct position on the road to turn one way or
another or to stop, has filled most of the requirements of safety.
It is best to learn the accepted signals of the locality in which
driving is done, but, failing this, signal in your own way, plainly
and in plenty of time.
Judicious use of the horn as a signal is important. Use it when-
ever it is needed, but avoid unnecessary horn sounding. Indis-
criminate use of the horn is annoying to other motorists and to
pedestrians. Especially when used to excess in signalling elderly
pedestrians and children, sounding the horn frequently defeats its
own purpose, and, in fact, sometimes creates a dangerous situation
which otherwise would not have existed.


The Good Driver —No one wants to be known as a careless
driver or a menace on the road. The penalty for a moment’s inat-
tention, a careless burst of speed, or a neglected car may be more
than we care to pay.
It is well to remember that when driving sixty miles per hour,
if the eyes are allowed to wander off the road for only two seconds
the car will travel a distance of 176 feet.
Too often the innocent suffer while the guilty escape. It is
not a pretty picture, but the statistics on motor accidents are plain,
blunt and shocking. They cannot be denied —and the drivers of
motor vehicles are often responsible.
Distance a car will travel at 60 miles per hour


It is just as easy to be a good driver as a poor one. No sacri-
fices are involved —not even of time. The good driver recognises
the capabilities of his vehicle, his own limitations respon-
sibilities. He keeps his car in good condition. He is considerate
and courteous on the road. In protecting his own interests he con-
tributes to the safety of all. "SAFETY FIRST.”
Carbon Monoxide Gas —Carbon monoxide gas, which is pre-
sent in the exhaust gas from every car, is extremely poisonous. Its
presence is difficult to detect, because it is colourless, tasteless and
odourless —yet a small quantity can be fatal.
Keep garage doors open
Ventilation is always vital
Never run your engine in a closed garage —open the doors
before starting the engine and keep them open all the time while
the engine is running.
It is advisable to make an occasional examination to be sure
that the exhaust lines, including muffler, gaskets and exhaust pipe,
are in good condition and avoid all exhaust leaks as escaping
exhaust gas could be responsible for a dangerous accumulation of
carbon monoxide gas in the driver’s compartment, especiallv
while driving with the windows closed.


DIAGNOSIS IN EMERGENCIES
The possibility that you will ever find yourself in such an emerg-
ency that you will require any of the following information is
slight. Nevertheless, emergencies may arise occasionally when the
driver must rely upon his own resources, and it is annoying to
learn afterward that the difficulty could have been corrected with-
out help.
The following suggestions will be found helpful in such cir-
cumstances: —
Starting Motor fails to crank engine or cranks it very
slowly
1. Turn on the headlamps and note if they light normally. If
the headlamps do not light and the starting motor fails to oper-
ate, the difficulty is probably due to poor battery connections or a
weak battery.
(a) Tighten the battery connections, the ground connection and the
connections at the starter switch. If the battery terminals are cor-
roded, they must be cleaned.
(b) If the battery still fails to operate, the cause is probably a dis-
charged battery. Check the battery with a hydrometer. See infor-
mation on the care of the battery.
2. If the headlamps light normally, press the starter button
and if the starter does not operate, note the intensity of the head-
lamps. If they become dimmed or if they go out, proceed as fol-
lows, trying the starter after each operation: —
(a) Tighten the battery connections and those at the starter switch.
If the battery terminals are corroded, they must be cleaned.
(b) See that the ground wire is tight where it fastens to the frame
of the car.
(c) Check the battery with a hydrometer. See instructions for the care
of the battery on page 29-
id) Shift the transmission into high gear and, with the ignition turned
off, push the car a few feet to determine if there is any mechani-
cal condition that would prevent the engine being cranked by the
starter.
3. If, when pressing die starter button with the headlamps on,
the starter does not operate and there is no reduction in the inten-
sity of the headlamps, there is probably a loose connection at the
starter switch.


4. If the scarcer cranks the engine very slowly, it is probably
clue to one of the following causes: —
(a) Partially discharged battery.
(b) 400 heavy an engine oil. This is more likely in cold weather, if
the oil has not been changed to the correct winter grade.
When the engine cannot be started due to battery or starter
difficulty or to heavy engine oil, time is often saved by having the
car pushed by another car to start it. Have the stalled car in high
gear and the ignition on. Then, when the engine is started, the car
can be driven to a G.M.-H. Dealer to have the trouble corrected.
Engine fails to start when cranked at proper speed
1. Be sure ignition switch is turned on all the way to assure
proper contact.
2. If the starter has been operated for some time without
results, it is possible that the cylinders are flooded. To correct this,
crank the engine by means of the starter, with the ignition on and
the throttle held wide open. When the excess fuel has been
expelled from the cylinders, ignition should occur, starting the
engine. Not more than 15 to 20 seconds should be required to
clear the cylinders.
3. If the engine does not start, it should be determined
whether fuel is reaching the carburettor.
(a) Make sure first that there is sufficient fuel in the tank.
(b) See that the fuel pipe connections at the fuel pump and carburet-
tor are tight.
(c) If these connections are tight and no loss of fuel is noted at these
points, disconnect the fuel pipe at the carburettor. Crank the
engine with the starter. If fuel flows from this pipe, it may be
assumed that the difficulty is not due to lack of fuel.
(d) If fuel does not flow from the pipe when the engine is cranked
and there is sufficient fuel in the tank, remove the fuel tank cap
and crank the engine again. If about 15 seconds of cranking causes
fuel to flow out of the pipe, look for a clogged vent hole in the
fuel tank cap. This should be cleaned out thoroughly before re-
placing the cap.
4. If the engine still does not start, remove the distributor cap
and crank the engine with the starter until the breaker points arc
closed. Then, with the ignition switch turned on, open the breaker
points by hand. If no sparking whatever is observed at the points


when they are snapped open, there is probably a loose connection
or an open circuit.
(a) Tighten all terminals at the ignition switch, battery charge indica-
tor and ignition coil.
(b) If current still does not flow, inspect breaker points. If necessary,
clean and adjust them as described under 'Emergency Adjustments.’
5. If current is shown by sparking when points are separated
by hand and yet the engine will not start, check intensity of the
ignition spark as follows: —
(a) Remove the cable from one of the spark plugs and hold it £ in.
from some clean point of the cylinder head while someone oper-
ates the starter with the ignition turned on. A good spark at least
£ in. long should appear.
(b) If not, clean and adjust the breaker points, if this has not already
been done.
(c) If a good spark still is not obtained, see that the spark plug wires
are pushed firmly into the top of the distributor cap. Wipe off the
cap carefully inside and outside.
6. If a good spark is obtained when the engine is cranked
while holding a spark plug cable \ in. from the cylinder and yet
engine does not start, remove the spark plugs and clean them as
well as possible. Reset the gaps and see that none of the plugs is
cracked or broken. See "Emergency Adjustments” for instructions
on cleaning spark plugs.
Engine stops on Road —Make tests Numbers 3,4, 5 and 6
under "Engine Fails to Start When Cranked at Proper Speed.”
Engine misfires regularly in one or more cylinders
1. The most probable cause of regular misfiring in a cylinder
is a dirty spark plug. To determine which plug is misfiring, close
the throttle so the engine will idle slowly. Hold a wooden-
handled screwdriver so it touches both the cylinder head and a
spark plug terminal, thus short-circuiting the plug.
If the plug is good, there will be a noticeable slowing of the
speed of the engine. If the plug is not firing there will be no dif-
ference in the operation of the engine. Repeat the process on each
spark plug in the engine.
After the inoperative plug has been located, it should be
cleaned and adjusted, or replaced if necessary. See instructions on
cleaning plugs under "Emergency Adjustments.”


Engine misses irregularly
1. If the engine misfires irregularly, apparently in all cylin-
ders, proceed as follows: —
(a) Remove the valve cover and lubricate the valve stems with kero-
sene to free up any that may be sticking from gummy oil. Then
adjust all valves as instructed under "Emergency Adjustments.”
(b) Clean and adjust the breaker points as instructed under "Emerg-
ency Adjustments.”
(c) Remove the distributor cap. Push the spark plug wires firmly into
the cap. Be careful to remove all moisture from cap.
(d) Remove, clean and adjust the spark plugs.
Engine overheats —In hot weather, engine temperature may
increase soon after the engine has stopped. This condition is nor-
mal and should not be considered as overheating.
Also, on a long, hard pull in hot weather, the temperature
may rise above normal. This should be only temporary and the
engine should cool as soon as its load is reduced.
If' there is some abnormal condition causing overheating, it
will usually cause a more pronounced and prolonged temperature
increase.
1. See that the radiator is filled with water. Caution, —In
cases of overheating, do not remove the radiator cap until the
engine has been stopped for a few minutes, as there is danger of
steam and boiling water escaping and causing a painful burn. Do
not pour cold water into the radiator if the engine is overheated,
as this may crack the cylinder block. Let the engine cool off and
then add water slowly till the cooling system is filled.
2. Check the fan belt adjustment. See instructions under
"Emergency Adjustments.”
3. See that there is sufficient oil of the proper grade in the
crankcase and that the oil pressure gauge shows the correct
pressure.
4. Remove the radiator cap and with the engine running at a
good speed see if there is any evidence of the water being in cir-
culation. If not, the thermostat at the front of the cylinder head
may not be operating.
5. See that the radiator grille and cellular spaces of the radi-
ator core are clean and have not become clogged with insects or
dirt to such an extent as to interfere with the passage of air.


EMERGENCY ADJUSTMENTS
To be made properly, many of the adjustments on your Chev-
rolet require the use of tools and equipment not readily available
to the car owner. However, there may be occasions when the car
will require some attention while out of reach of an Authorized
Chevrolet Service Station. The following information is given to
help the owner in these circumstances and the instructions should
be considered only as emergency measures. After such adjustments
are made, they should be checked by an Authorized Chevrolet
Service Station at the first opportunity. If the car has received the
regular inspections and adjustments which have been recom-
mended, the following information may never be required.
Fan Belt- -In addition to driving the fan, this belt also drives
the generator and water pump. It should always be kept in proper
adjustment as illustrated below. Inspect each 5000 miles.
The fan belt may slip as a result of the accumulation of oil or
grease or of natural wear, causing overheating.
If the belt is greasy, wash it with petrol and a stiff bristle
brush, wiping it with a clean cloth.
Caution. — Do not operate car belt as coolant
will be lost due to overheating, and damage to the engine tv ill
result.
To adjust Fan Belt— Loosen clamp bolts 1, 2 and 3. Adjust fan
belt tension to \ in. "slack” as shown at 6. Tighten lower clamp
bolt 2 and re-check "slack.” When properly adjusted, tighten
clamp bolts 1, 2 and 3.
FAN BELT ADJUSTMENT
1. Generator Upper
Clamp Bolt
2. Generator Lower
Clamp Bolt
3. Adjusting Link
Pivot Bolt
4. Generator Pulley
5. Fan Pulley
6. Slack in Properly
Adjusted Belt—½ in.


Tightening the fan belt too much will cause premature and
excessive wear of the water pump and generator bearings.
Spark Plugs —In re-gapping the spark plugs, the adjustment
should always be made upon the grounded electrode and never on
the centre electrode as this may crack or break the porcelain.
The recommended setting
of spark plug gaps is .040 in.
When re-setting never gap
wider than .040 in., as this will
cause misfiring after the plugs
are in use a short time.
Spark plugs should be clean-
ed and re-gapped each 5000
miles, when engine is tuned.
Spark Plug Adjustment
Valve Clearance Adjustment —Run the engine 15 to 20
minutes or until it has reached normal operating temperature.
Remove the valve rocker cover. With the engine running at
idling speed, loosen the lock-nut at the push rod end of the valve
rocker arm. Turn the adjusting screw with a screwdriver until a
feeler gauge of the proper thickness can just be passed between
the end of the valve stem and the valve rocker arm. Clearance
should be .006 in. min. to .008 in. max. for intake valves and
.013 in. min. and .015 in. max. for exhaust valves. Then securely
tighten the lock-nut, being very careful not to change the adjust-
VALVE
CLEARANCE
ADJUSTMENT
1. Adjusting Screw.
2. Lock Nut.
3. Location for testing
clearance with
feeler gauge.


ment while doing so. Re-check the adjustment on each rocker
arm.
The clearance of the inlet and exhaust valve must never be set
closer than the specified minimum, or burning of the valves and
loss of power will result.
On cars regularly subjected to sustained high speed driving it
is recommended that the valves be set the maximum clearance.
Distributor Breaker Points —The distributor breaker points
should have a clean, grey, frosted appearance. To clean the
breaker points, insert a small, flat file between them; hold them
lightly against the file with the fingers, and draw the file straight
out. Repeat this operation until the breaker points are clean and
square. The distributor points should be kept square with each
other and make contact over their entire surfaces. Wipe them
with a clean, soft cloth.
Badly burned breaker points require more extensive treatment.
If this condition exists, have an Authorized Chevrolet Service
Station make any adjustment or replacement necessary.
To adjust the breaker points, remove the distributor cap and
rotor. Shift into high gear and roll the car slowly until the breaker
arm is exactly on the peak of the cam. The breaker points are then
open the maximum distance. Loosen the lock-screw and turn the
eccentric adjusting screw to the right or left, increasing or decreas-
ing the gap to .018 in., using a .018 in. feeler gauge. Securely
tighten the lock-screw, being careful not to change the gap, and
re-check the adjustment after tightening.
DISTRIBUTOR
1. Condenser.
2. Distributor Cam.
3. Breaker Arm.
4. Breaker Points.
5. Breaker Point Adjusting
Screw.
6. Breaker Point Lock Screw.
Ignition Timing for best performance —Ignition is timed
at the factory for utmost performance and economy with regular
fuel. The combination of factory ignition setting and the high
compression designed into the engine may occasionally result in
a light "ping” or "spark rap” on some cars using regular fuel,


when accelerated rapidly with wide open throttle in high gear.
This is not harmful to the engine, and is evidence that the
ultimate in performance and economy is being obtained from the
fuel used. Due to variation in fuel, altitude, humidity, tempera-
ture, etc., it is sometimes desirable to re-set the ignition timing.
The octane selector is a device that provides a simple adjust-
ment to compensate for the variation in the octane rating of dif-
ferent fuels and to enable the engine to operate as efficiently as
possible with the type of fuel being used.
It is necessary to- adjust the octane selector only when chang-
ing to a fuel with different anti-knock qualities or octane rating
from that for which it is set.
To change the octane adjustment, loosen the screw located
just behind the octane scale and advance or retard the ignition dis-
tributor as required, moving the distributor toward the retard
("R”) side of the scale for a low octane fuel and toward the
advance ("A”) side of the scale for a higher octane fuel.
Rotate the distributor an amount equal to not more than one
graduation of the scale at a time, and each time lock the adjust-
ment and test the car. The final position should be such that only
a very light "ping” or "spark rap” is evident when accelerating
rapidly in high gear with wide open throttle.
Carburettor Adjustment
—lmproper engine operation
usually results from some
cause other than an incorrect-
ly adjusted carburettor. The
carburettor adjustment should
not be disturbed without mak-
ing sure that the cause of the
difficulty is not elsewhere. The
adjustments possible by the car
owner affect low speed opera-
tion only.
Octane Selector Adjustment
Idling Speed Adjustment —This adjustment regulates the
speed at which the engine runs with a closed throttle. It should


be made only after the engine has been thoroughly warmed up.
Push the throttle button on the instrument panel all the way in.
Turn the throttle stop screw "B” on the carburettor in or out
until the engine runs at the desired speed. If it runs too fast, turn
the screw outward; if too slowly, turn it inward.
Correctly adjusted, the car will run 8 miles an hour with the
throttle closed, in third gear upon a smooth, level road.
CARBURETTOR
ADJUSTMENT
A. Idle Adjusting Screw
B. Throttle Stop Screw.
Idling Mixture Adjustment —Fuel for idling speeds is regu-
lated by needle valve at the right rear side of the carburettor.
This is adjusted to the correct position as follows: —
Run the engine long enough to warm it up thoroughly. With
the ignition off, turn the idle needle valve "A” in, or clockwise,
until it has been closed all the way. Do not force the idle needle
valve on to its seat, as this will damage it.
Starting from the closed position, open the idle needle valve
from 1 to 2 turns. Start the engine and let it idle. Try turning the
idle adjusting screw each way from this position until the setting
is reached that gives the smoothest running of the engine.
If the engine does not run properly after this adjustment, it
indicates that the difficulty is not with the carburettor, and your
Authorized Chevrolet Service Station should be consulted.


Air Cleaner Ordinarily,
cleaning and re-oiling the air
cleaner every 2000 miles should
be sufficient. It must be cleaned
more frequently when the car is
operated on dusty roads.
To clean the air cleaner
remove the wing nut and
remove the cleaning element.
This will make it possible
to remove the filtering ele-
ment. Clean this part by dip-
ping it several times in clean
petrol. (Do not use Ethyl or
coloured fuel.) Re-oil the filter-
ing element by thoroughly cov-
ering with a fresh, clean film
of S.A.E. 50 engine oil.
Air Cleaner
The felt pad in cover of cleaner must be kept free of oil to
function properly. When the engine is first started after oiling the
air cleaner, the exhaust may be clouded with blue smoke. This
will be only a temporary condition and will not indicate trouble.
Oil Filter —lf your car is equipped with an oil filter, the filter-
ing element should be renewed when the engine oil on the dipper
stick is dark and discoloured.
Under normal conditions the filtering element should be
changed at 8000- to 10,000-mile intervals.
Cleaning Fuel Pump Filter —The fuel pump is provided
with a glass bowl and a filter, through which the fuel passes.
Dirt and water settle in the glass bowl, which may be removed
for cleaning. To remove, loosen the retaining nut over the bowl
until the bowl, gasket and filter can be lifted out.
Be sure the gasket is not broken and that the bowl seats pro-
perly when replaced. Tighten the retaining nut at the bottom to
prevent leakage.
It is a good practice to run the engine until the bowl fills, to
make sure that it has been properly installed.


FUEL PUMP
1. Retaining Nut.
2. Glass Sediment Bowl.
Fuel Tank Cap —The fuel tank is vented by a hole in the filler
cap which admits air to balance the pressure in the tank with the
outside atmospheric pressure. Should it be necessary to replace the
cap with a new one, be sure a vented type is used.
Removal of Lamp Bulbs —Headlamps: To remove headlamp
bulbs follow the operations shown in the accompanying illustra-
tions.
Bulbs that have turned black should be replaced. Headlamp
bulbs can be installed in only one position. The base is marked
"TOP” to indicate its location. When installing bulbs, be sure
that all three hold-down lugs enter the slots in the bulb base. Turn
the bulb to the right so that the hold-down lugs are in the extreme
ends of the slots.
Be sure the rubber seal ring is in the recess in rim of reflector
before lens is put in place.
Two adjusting screws "B” in Fig. 3 are for aiming the head-
lamp beam. The top screw is for raising or lowering the beam
and the side screw is for sidewise aiming of beam.
If the occasion demands, the reflector can be removed, after
the lens is removed, by holding one of the side clips away from
the reflector rim. When reflector is installed, see that the three
hair pin locating clips are in place in the holes in the sub-body to
assure proper location of reflector.
Instrument Lamps —The instrument cluster, speedometer and
ignition lock are illuminated by five bulbs inserted at rear of the
panel, which may be replaced by pulling out the snap sockets
holding the bulbs.


Parking Lamps —To replace bulb, remove door and lens by
taking out the two screws in the door. Then remove bulb from
socket.
Tail and Stop Lamps —To replace bulb, remove door and
lens by taking out two screws in the door. Then remove bulb
from socket.
Humber Plate Lamp —To replace bulb, take out lamp cover
retaining screws, remove cover and glass and remove bulb from
socket.
Dome Lamp —The dome lamp- glass is held in position by
three spring clips and may be removed by simply pulling down-
wards. The bulb can then be removed and replaced.
Cleaning Headlamps —Remove the lens and wipe the surface
of the reflector with a soft clean cloth —or apply a mixture of
lampblack and pure alcohol. Always wipe from the centre straight
out to the rim. Rubbing with a circular motion may cause slight
scratches in the reflector and reduce its efficiency.
If a headlamp lens becomes broken, the reflector should be
protected by fastening a cloth over the headlamp face, until a new
lens can be secured.
Fuse —A 30-ampere fuse located behind the lighting switch is in
effect a safety switch which burns out as a result of heavy electri-
cal loads being placed on the wiring.
In the event of a short circuit, the fuse may burn out. It is
advisable to carry one or two spare fuses for an emergency, even
though they probably will never be used. If the lamps fail to
light, first examine the fuse. If it is found to be burned out,
replace it with a new one. If the new one burns out, this indicates
a short circuit in the wiring and it should be inspected to deter-
mine the cause of the difficulty.
Clutch —The illustration on page 14 is purely symbolic of clutch
operation in general, and is not intended to portray the clutch
design with which your Chevrolet is equipped. The new Chevrolet
clutch is a very recent development incorporating many new
engineering refinements.


Fig. 1. Remove screw in bottom of
outer rim
Fig. 3. Loosen three screws "A”.
Do not disturb adjusting screws "B”
Fig. 5. Remove lens from reflector while
holding one of the side spring clips "C”
away from lens
Fig. 2. Swing outer rim out at bottom
and lift upward to disengage lug at
top of rim
Fig. 4. After three screws "A” have been
loosened, rotate inner rim counter-
clockwise and remove
Fig. 6. Remove bulb by rocking
slightly on its base and turning it
counter-clockwise


Clutch Assembly
1. Throw-out Bearing 3. Clutch Cover Assembly
2. Throw-out Fork 4. Clutch Disc and Facing
5. Flywheel
The clutch pedal is properly adjusted when there is f in. to
1 in. free movement before the clutch starts to release.
The free movement of the clutch pedal is regulated by the
adjustment in the link extending from the pedal arm to the clutch
throw-out yoke.
To make this adjustment, loosen the check nut ”A” and turn
the adjusting nut "B” until the correct amount of free movement
is obtained.
CLUTCH PEDAL
FREE MOVEMENT
Adjust for ¾" to 1" free
movement before the
clutch starts to release.


CLUTCH PEDAL
ADJUSTMENT
1. Loosen check nut A
2. Turn adjusting nut "B”
until the ¾” to 1" free
movement is obtained.
Brakes —It is important to maintain the master cylinder brake
fluid level slightly more than half full. It is advisable to check the
brake fluid level at 1000-mile intervals. When adding to or refill-
ing the master cylinder, use only genuine brake fluid as marketed
by G.M.-H. This brake fluid is blended so that it will neither
corrode metal parts nor harm the rubber connections and seals,
and it will flow freely in cold weather and will not evaporate in
hot tropical climates.
Mineral base oils must not be used in the brake system, as the
smallest quantity will cause the rubber parts in the brake system
to swell and become inoperative.
Brakes should be adjusted when the pedal travels within two
inches of the toe-board upon severe brake application; or for high
speed driving, when the pedal travels within three inches of the
toe-board.
If the brake tubing to any wheel cylinder is disconnected, that
wheel cylinder must have the air removed by bleeding, and when-
ever the main brake tubing is removed from the master cylinder,
the air must be bled from all four wheel brake cylinders.
Brake adjustments when required should be referred to an
Authorized Chevrolet Service Station, which will have the neces-
sary special tools to perform this operation properly.
CHANGING WHEELS AND TYRES
Removing Wheels —To remove wheels proceed as follows: —
1. Set the hand brake securely and remove the hub cap. Barely
loosen the nuts which hold the wheel in place.
2. Place edge of jack base (as marked) as close to tyre as
possible.


3. Raise jack until "T” head fits hard under upper edge of rim
as shown in illustration.
4. Raise jack until tyre is well clear of ground, then unfold
handle and slide pilot jack under the lower arm of front
suspension or —at rear —under rear spring, where anchored
axle.
5. Lower the wheel jack until car rests on pilot and remove
wheel jack.
6. Turn off the nuts which hold the wheel in place, using the
wheel nut wrench. Slide wheel from hub and replace with
spare. Tighten hub bolts all round gradually.
Note. —It is a good idea to tighten these bolts again after the
wheel is on the ground.
7. Replace the jack on the rim as before and raise the car enough
to remove the pilot. Remove pilot and lower the jack.
CHANGING WHEELS
AND TYRES
1. Jacking up wheel.
2. Pilot in position—Front
3. Pilot in position-Rear


Dismounting the Tyre-Changing tyres is not an easy task
to one inexperienced in this operation, and it is ordinarily done
at your service station. However, on those rare occasions when a
tyre must be changed by the driver, the following instructions will
help to simplify the process.
After the wheel has been removed, deflate the tube entirely.
Lay the wheel down and loosen the beads or edges of the tyre
on each side. Use a tyre iron or other flat tool. With the wheel
still flat, push the tyre bead, on the side opposite the valve, into
the well in the wheel rim. Hold this section of the tyre in the well
with the knees or feet.
Place a tyre iron or other flat tool about 4 inches on each side
of the valve between the tyre and the rim. By forcing down on
these tools, raise the bead over the edge of the flange.
Follow around the flange with one tool until the bead is com-
pletely free from rim. Then push the valve stem out and remove
the tube.
Turn the wheel and tyre over on the other side and with the
feet, force the top edge of the tyre down inside the well in the
wheel rim. Opposite this section that has been pushed into the
well, insert two tyre irons under the lower edge of the tyre about
12 inches apart.
Keeping the opposite side down in the well, push down on
the two tyre irons so that the wheel rim flange is raised up over
the tyre. Hold the tyre irons in that position with the feet and lift
the wheel from the tyre.
Dismounting the Tyre
Raising bead over rim flange Final stage in dismounting tyre


Mounting the Tyre —Clean all dirt from inside of casing.
Application of a little vegetable oil (mineral oil is harmful to
rubber and should not be used) or soft soap to the inside and out-
side edge of the tyre casing will make assembly easier.
Inflate the tube until it is barely rounded out and insert it in
the casing, placing the valve next to the red dot or balance mark
on the casing. See that the valve is straight and centrally located
between the edges of the tyre.
Lay the wheel on the ground with the valve hole toward you.
Holding the tyre with the valve toward you, lay it on the wheel
and push a section of the lower edge of the tyre next to the valve,
down into the well of the wheel rim.
Push the valve stem through the valve hole in the wheel rim.
Check to see that the tube is not caught between the rim and the
Mounting the Tyre
Placing first bead over rim flange Forcing second bead over rim flange
edge of the tyre and then force the remainder of the lower edge
of the tyre over the rim flange.
With the tyre irons, force the top edge of the tyre over the
rim flange, working it over a small section at a time.
Inflate the tyre to a low pressure —about 7 to 10 pounds.
Bounce the wheel to settle the tyre, making sure it is even all
around the flange. Then inflate to the correct pressure.


1. Battery Charge Indicator
2. Cigar Lighter
3. Battery
4. Starting Motor
5. Starter Switch and Relay
6. Fuel Gauge (Tank Unit)
7. Fuel Gauge
8. Ignition Switch
9. Horn Button
10. Horn Relay
11. Horn
12. Voltage Regulator —
B. Battery Terminal
G. Generator Terminal
F. Field Terminal
13. Generator
14. Light Switch
15. Fuse
16. Ignition Coil
17. Breaker Points
18. Condenser
19. Ignition Distributor Cap
20. Spark Plugs
21. Dome Lamp
22. Dome Lamp Switch
23. Glove Compartment Light
24. Glove Compartment Light
Switch
25. Stop Lamp Switch
26. Licence Lamp
27. Tail and Stop Lamps
28. Instrument Panel, Speedometer
and Ignition Lock Lights
29. Clock Light*
30. Instrument Light Rheostat
31. Headlamp Foot Switch
32. Parking Lamps
33. Headlamps
34. Headlamp Beam Indicator
35. Distributor Polarity Reversing
Switch
36. Distributor Polarity Reversing
Switch —reverse position
37. Motor Wiper Fuse
38. Motor Wiper Switch
39. Wiper Motor
40. Tail Lamp Switch
41. Automatic Switch for Luggage
Boot
* Standard equipment on Special De Luxe Model only
t 35-36 used only on U.S. units


Illustrated above is the G.M.-H. Service Policy which you received
from your Dealer and which identifies you as the purchaser of a
new Chevrolet. This is your protection against defective material
and workmanship under the terms of the Standard Warranty.
Attached to your Service Policy are two coupons each of which
entitles you to a free inspection and adjustment, one at the 1000-
mile period and the other at 2000 miles. These are provided by
your Dealer and ensure that your car is in perfect adjustment
during the “breaking-in” period.


Authorized Distributors
Genuine G.M.-H. Parts
and Accessories
QUEENSLAND
E. G. Eager & Son Limited, Breakfast Creek Road, Newstead, Brisbane
Motor Supplies (Pty.) Ltd., Perry Street, Brisbane
NEW SOUTH WALES
Boyded Pty. Limited, 109-119 Phillip Street, Sydney
McLeod, Kelso & Lee Pty. Ltd., 23-33 Hunter Street West, Newcastle
Larke, Neave & Carter Pty. Ltd., 177-185 William Street, Sydney
Young & Green Ltd., 673-675 Hunter Street West, Newcastle
W. H. Lober & Co. Ltd., 80-92 McElhone Street, Sydney
Stack & Co. Pty. Ltd., Crowle House, 105 York Street, Sydney
W. T. Coggins Pty. Ltd., 117 Parramatta Road, Camperdown
Westcott, Hazell & Co. Ltd., 225-227 Castlereagh Street, Sydney
Bennett & Wood Ltd., Pitt and Bathurst Streets, Sydney
Motor Traders (Vic.) Ltd., Albury
Reo Motors Pty. Ltd., 171-175 William Street, Sydney
Gibson, Battle & Co. Pty. Ltd., Cnr. Liverpool and Crown Sts., Sydney
Bennett & Barkell Ltd., Meagher and Chippen Streets, Sydney
VICTORIA
Preston Motors Pty. Ltd., 114 Franklin Street, Melbourne
S. A. Cheney Pty. Ltd., 22 Flinders Street, Melbourne
Southern Motors Pty. Ltd., 131-137 Lonsdale Street, Melbourne
Rhodes Motor Co. Pty. Ltd., 401 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne
E. A. Machin & Co. Pty. Ltd., 535 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne
Brooklands Accessories Pty. Ltd., 68-78 Sturt Street, South Melbourne
Queen’s Bridge Motors Pty. Ltd-, Queen’s Bridge Street, South Melbourne
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Motor Parts & Service Ltd., 161 Pirie Street, Adelaide
Freeman Motors Ltd., Grenfell Street, Adelaide
United Motors Ltd., 252 Pirie Street, 1 Adelaide
Motor Traders (S.A.) Ltd.-, 83-89 Flinders' Street, Adelaide
Messrs. Duncan & Co., 107-109 Pirie Street, Adelaide
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Sydney Atkinson Motors Ltd., Temple Court, Perth
Attwood Motors (1934) Ltd., 22-32 Stirling Street, Perth
Atkins (W.A.) Ltd., 894 Hay Street, Perth \
TASMANIA
Robt. Nettlefold Pty. Ltd., 115 Macquarie Street, Hobart
Motors Pty. Ltd., 165-171 Brisbane Street, Launceston




