

mirite Cross league.
No. IS.
PRICE ONE PENNY.


WHITE CROSS LEAGUE,
7, DEAN’S YARD, WESTMINSTER ABBEY, S,W.
OBJECTS.
PROMOTING—
I.—Purity among Men.
11. —A Chivalrous Respect for Womanhood.
111. —The Preservation of the Young from
Contamination.
IV.—Rescue Work.
V.—A Higher Tone of Public Opinion,
All men who approve of the above objects should
take their part in helping to carry them out.
Full particulars of the Society’s work and methods
may he had from the Secretary.
Funds are greatly needed to extend the work.
REASONS FOR JOINING THE SOCIETY.
Because I AM A CHRISTIAN, and because the
sins against which this Society is contending are a
hateful offence against the purity and holiness of Him
by Whose Name I am called, and Who died for me.
Because I AM A MAN, and therefore bound to
help all women, as being weaker than I am, and to
save them from degradation ; bound, above all, not to
make them the victims of my passions.
Because the evil is organised, and can only be met
by counter organisation.


W&fyxk Cross Jeagm
(Incorporated).
PAPERS FOR MEN.
No. 11.
“YOUR DUTY.”
Lieut.-Col. HERBERT EVERITT.
So th Thousandl.
PRINTED FOR THE
WHITE CROSS LEAGUE,
7, Dean's Yard , Westminster, London ,


PRINTED BY MILLER, SON, AND COMPV., LIMITED,
FAKENHAM AND LONDON.


“ YOUR DUTY.”
Lieut.-Col. Herbert Everity
J N the days of Brown Bess,” before
ironclads or rifled guns were made,
soldiers and sailors were not expected to
think for themselves; at all events, civilians
always talked as if it were quite a matter of
course that Jack should “ earn his pay like a
horse, and spend it like an ass ” ; and as to
“ Tommy Atkins,” the highest praise ever
written of him echoes this idea—
“ Theirs not to reason why,
Theirs not to make reply,
Theirs but to do—and die.”
Well, that is right enough still, as far as
obeying orders, and doing and dying goes,
for it was not only at Balaclava that “ some-
one had blundered ; ” but soldiers and sailors,


as well as officers, must now think for
themselves ; and mistakes are often redeemed
by the gallant and intelligent action of rank
and file, as well as by that of their leaders.
BLUNDERS,
Depend upon it, there is blundering enough
without our adding to it. “ Main strength
and stupidity” will not do for extended
order, machine guns, or torpedoes, nor for
other matters either. In these days every
man must think, not for himself only, hut for
others also.
The stupid old cry “ every man for himself ”
is obsolete, and many grand examples of self-
devotion amongst all ranks brighten'even the
saddest records of the Transvaal and the
Soudan, telling all who care to know, that
the glory of English arms is not mere blind
obedience, nor the dare-devil madness of
slaughter and victory, but duty, the deliberate
sacrifice of self for others, of man for man,
and of every man for his comrades and his
country. 8
It is sad to think that some of the very men
who would nobly risk their lives to defeat an
enemy or save a comrade, are (partly through
ignorance) crushing and killing, not their


enemies but their friends, more terribly and
at greater loss than ever men were killed in
action.
What do I m.ean ?
Go into the cause of the misery and disease
and death in this country and you will find
that much of it arises from men’s lust.
Drunkenness is bad enough, but the plague
of impurity is even more deadly and
contagious. Everybody knows about drunk-
enness, but perhaps you don’t believe that
lust is worse, and does more harm.
Before I go farther let me say that I don’t
want to make things out worse than they are,
and that I do not believe any man —worth
calling a man—is to be frightened out of evil
or into good.
“ The fear o’ hell’s a hangman’s whip
To baud the wretch in order,
But where ye feel your honour grip
Let that aye be your border.”
I want rather, if I can, to show you how
“ Evil is wrought for want of thought,
As well as want of heart,”
and that it is your duty, as brave men, to steer
clear of the blunders by which so much harm
is done, and to try to rescue others from the
terrible consequences.


CHASTITY.
What do you know about chastity ? Some
of you may remember learning at home or at
Sunday School: “My duty towards my neigh-
bour is—to keep my body in temperance,
soberness, and chastity.” Perhaps you are
already a sober man, but how about chastity ?
There are plenty of sober men in your ship
or regiment; how many are chaste ? The
drunkard is a marked man ; he knows himself
for a fool, and he gets punished in one way or
another, but the man who defiles his body
often thinks himself a very smart fellow.
His messmates, perhaps, think so too, and
unless he is caught in some horrible crime, or
brings some poor girl to utter shame and ruin,
no one takes any notice of his vice ; and not
always even then.
We know that some men suffer from
‘‘rheumatism” or “consumption,” others
become “ lunatic.” We hear of poor women
who commit suicide, or who live and die in
misery and disgrace ; of children born
diseased, or living neglected, or falling a prey
to vicious people ; we read newspaper accounts
of jealousies, violence, and murders, of
quarrels and disorders, of wretched families


and wrecked homes, of the degradation of the
poor and the ruin of the rich, but the real
cause of this misery and crime is seldom
mentioned; it is often man’s lust.
He says he must indulge his passion, and
never stops to think or care what the end
may be, and “ the end of these things is
death.”
“ WILD OATS."
Perhaps you would not wilfully injure a
woman, or ruin a child’s young life, but you
are a young man, and must “sow your wild
oats,” that is all, and if any harm come of it
—well, you never thought of that. What a
fool you would think a farmer who sowed
wild oats and expected to reap a crop of good
corn 1
“ Be not deceived ; God is not mocked :
for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he
also reap. He that soweth to the flesh shall
of the flesh reap corruption.”* Look at those
fellows in hospital, and those women in the
streets, and say, is not that the truth ?
Well, but how is a man to be pure? His
bodily appetite is against it, his whole sur-
roundings are against it ; he sees and hears
things every day that may put foul thoughts
Cq | yi i ty


into his mind, and his companions, perhaps,
help to drag him down. He does not wish to
go wrong, but he has not a chance. It is no
use talking about it. If we want him to keep
out of all this evil we must do something
more than show him the way—we must help
him.
FORNICATION.
Many men have no wish to be pure, or else
they don’t believe that it is either possible or
necessary, and others cheat themselves into
the belief that there is no need to try.
Of course it is no use trying to help a man
until he is convinced that he can and must do
the right thing, but I am writing for honest
men, not for men who are determined to call
evil good and good evil; on such, all words
are wasted.
Well, there' are still many men who by
force of habit won’t look facts in the face.
They tell us that they don’t injure themselves
or others, and only do what is ncituvcil, that a
man must indulge his appetites, and that there
are women who have nothing to lose by it.
Now just see for a moment what a mockery
this is.
Every time a man commits fornication he
either drags down some woman, makes her


the slave to lust, robs her of her hope of a
happy and innocent life, and brands her with
shame and disgrace, or else he adds fresh
links to the chain of slavery which already
binds her down and helps :o crush out her
chance of freedom or escape. No slavery is so
degraded or so wretched or so hopeless. You
know well enough that the laughter and
“ gaiety ” (!) of these women is all a hollow lie.
You know well enough that their lives are a
curse to them, and that they curse men in
dieir hearts as the cause of it all. You know
that they bear all the misery and disgrace
and horror of the life, while the men get off
scot free and swagger through life as if the
degradation and wretchedness of women were
a thing to glory in and brag about. So the
lie lives on and men say that because they
suffer no shame or disgrace or pain, and the
poor women have to bear it all, that men are
not to blame. God knows. There is justice,
though we see it not. Do you say, “It is
the women who tempt the men ? ” That was
the cowardly answer of fallen Adam, and has
served as an excuse ever since. When a
woman has been seduced and betrayed by
some false man ; when she cannot return to
her home, and respectable people shut the


door on her, she thinks she cannot be much
worse than she is already, and must starve or
go on the streets. Then she takes to tempting
men. Why should she care ? What have
men done for her that she should spare
them ? When men go with a fallen woman
they wilfully share the fault and penalty of
that other man who first dragged her down.
You may have read of some of the horrors
of the worst forms of this vice : of helpless
children, sold by their shameless parents to
debauched men, who abuse them as they
please, and then cast them out to perish as
they may. Soldiers and Sailors, are these
the men you would hail as comrades, and
feel proud to serve with? It would be an
insult to you to think it. It makes a brave
man’s heart sick to think that such scoundrels
live among us and pass off for decent people.
Who is to blame ?
WHO IS TO BLAME ?
How can you and I find fault with other
men if our hands are not clean ? The fault
lies at our own door, if we have had our
share in bringing about the state of things
which makes such brutality possible. If we
have no respect for our own purity, how can


we expect other men to be pure ? or do we
think there would be no great harm done if
other men were no worse than ourselves ?
Where shall we draw the line ? To what
extent do you indulge yourself ? What do
you read most eagerly in the newspapers ?
What sort of pictures do you fancy ? What
books do you get hold of ? What do you
enjoy to talk about ? and what language do
you use ? What jokes and songs do you
laugh at ? What do you think of in your
bed ? How do you behave to the girls ?
Are you quite content with your own
conduct ? You know you are not. You
know that men should be better than that.
Be honest, and say the truth —men should
be pure. You think women should be pure,
but how in the name of common sense can
women be pure if men are not ?
Yet how is it possible for a man to be
clean in body and mind if in such matters as
have been mentioned he takes corruption into
his very life through the senses of the body
and the thoughts and imaginations of the
mind ? Some things stick like pitch. A
smutty joke once laughed at is seldom for-
gotten, a habit of filthy talk clings to the foul
mouth and will not leave it. So with all the


rest : the man who corrupts himself and
others in such ways cannot know anything of
purity, and has no right to say “Impurity is
natural, because I am impure.’’
If a man will turn out when he wakes, use
plenty of cold water, do plenty of hard work,
take lots of exercise, eat and drink moderately
of plain food, amuse himself heartily in good
and modest company, and go to bed healthily
tired and sleepy, he will not find so much
difficulty in the way of purity.
“ THERE IS NO HARM DONE.”
No Englishman, no man who is not a
scoundrel, would take advantage of his
strength to do deadly harm to a weak woman
if he thought about it ; but men won't think,
because they don’t mean to give up their
indulgence, and so they pretend to believe
there is no harm done. No harm ! Just for
one minute put away this lie, and let your
own man’s heart and conscience speak to you.
Have you never seen or pictured to yourself
the woman you would really love and admire
most in all the world ? What was she like ?
Perhaps you could give her a name. Perhaps
you have found her only in some book or
story, or have fancied you saw her in some


woman you have met. What was she like ?
A happy child, perhaps, with a little angel
face and bright merry ways, running to meet
her father, and throwing her little arms round
his neck to kiss and hug him ; some pretty
girl full of grace and innocence; some good
wife and mother, the joy of her home ; some
gentle nurse about the sick bed; but what-
ever she was, how different from that poor
woman we know too well, with her hollow
laugh, her gaudy finery, and her shameless
ways, whom we may have helped to make
what she is. “No harm done ! ”
What of those poor girls who have been
enticed away from home and ruined before
they knew how heartless men could be ?
What of those poor servant girls who fancy a
red coat and find themselves robbed of
character and place, and driven to the streets
for a living ? Had it not been for the men
these might have been bright and happy
women too. We like to think of our sister
and mother, our wife or daughter as modest
women; well, these others are somebody’s
sisters and daughters. What have we helped
to make them ? What matters ? We have
had our fling, we are brave fellows, we have
proved ourselves men, and we have left all


the shame and misery to the women. Can we
say “ There is no harm done ” ?
EXCUSES.
Perhaps you say,“ That is not fair. I should
like to see all women pure, and all men too.
I wish I might never again meet a shameless
woman to tempt me. I would gladly try to
curb my passions, if that would mend
matters ; but while things are as they are I
have no chance, I can’t break off old habits,
I can’t shut myself up from the rest of the
world, and if I could I should still carry
about with me this lust you talk about. We
soldiers and sailors can’t marry, and settle
down—at least, not as young men ; some day
I hope to, and to be a steady man, but you
can’t expect a young chap to be a saint, and
I hate a hypocrite.” Do you ? then let us
be quite straight and above-board about this.
Cali a spade a spade, and don’t let us have
one set of words for the women and another
for us men ; don’t let them bear all the shame,
and take none to ourselves.
If we call those poor girls “ fallen
women,” or some such name, pray what are
you and lif we share their sin ? “ Fallen
men ” or “ hypocrites,” what is it to be ?


As to saying that women should be pure,
but men cannot, that is not merely a lie, but a
lie of the worst kind, because there is just
enough truth about it to make men believe it
who wish to—and many do. We sailors and
soldiers, married and single, often leave our
homes for months or years. We all have the
same trials ; we can stand hunger and thirst
and sickness, wounds or death if need be,
side by side, and if we are not cowards, we
can, and do, face this other trial amongst the
rest, conquer it, and live brave men. Do you
suppose that none of your comrades do this ?
that every married man is an adulterer, and
every single man as bad or worse ? No, the
man who says “ men cannot keep pure ” is a
man who is impure himself, and wishes to
make out that all men are as bad as he is.
A HARD FIGHT.
It is often difficult for a man to be pure,
and many who try meet with failure ; but
what then ? Our whole training as soldiers
or sailors teaches us that difficulties must be
got over; and as to “ failures,” our enemies
used to say that Englishmen never knew
when they were beaten. The French say we
were defeated at Waterloo. Perhaps we were.


but we would not believe it, and held on till
the Prussians came up, and then we shouted
• u Victory ! ” and so it was.
It needs much courage to conquer lust, but
the fight gets easier as we go on. Even if we
fall we must rise again, and never surrender,
but fight on to the end. The victory over seif
is the grandest triumph that the greatest
hero ever won. The fight must be fought,
unless we have made up our minds to give
ourselves up body and soul to the evil way,
and to say, 44 Let us eat and drink, for
to-morrow we died'
Your conscience is not dead. You ace not
content to carry through life a curse to
yourself and to your companions, and perhaps
to pass it on to children yet unborn.
How is one to keep pure ? It is chiefly a
work that lies between each man and his
God; a secret struggle in which no other can
help him, and in which he must apply the
remedies himself, and with a firm will. There
are many helps which he should know and
use. (See p. 17,)
In his own strength he can do nothing, but
he 88 can do all things through Christ that
strengthened! ” him. That is the conclusion
of the whole matter. The man who has “ the


fear of God before his eyes,” and the love of
his feilow-men in his heart, cannot but strive
after purity, and in so doing half the work is
done. The sights and sounds and company
that befouled his life no longer cling to him;
the heavy chains of an evil conscience have
fallen off, he finds pleasure and peace, and
hope and happiness, of which the impure man
can know nothing. His life is of some good
in the world, it carries health and happiness
instead of poison with it, it has in this world
the reward of unselfishness ; in the end, peace
and eternal hope, and in the world to come,—-
“ Life Everlasting.”
HELPS TO PURITY OF LIFE.
“ I keep under my body, and bring it into sub-
jection.”—St. Paul, x Cor. ix. 27.
The following simple rules of life, if
bravely followed, will be found most useful
to men who honestly wish to conquer evil
passions and lead a steady life.
PREVENTION.
i. Constant occupation ; work and exercise-
keep the body healthy.


Wholesome reading, recreation, and
amusement should leave the mind no idle
time, or inclination for brooding over foul
thoughts.
2. Moderation in eating, drinking, and
sleep.
Highly seasoned food, strong drink, and
slothful habits produce evil desires; whole-
some food, hard bed, getting up as soon as
awake, getting to sleep as soon as possible,
and fresh air in the bedroom, will help to
keep them off.
3. Plentiful use of cold water , scrupulous
cleanliness, bathing and sponging, help to
prevent lust.
4. Avoid unhealthy excitements, such as foul
talk, pictures, reading, amusements, or
company.
Choose your company, amusements, and
occupations when you are sober-minded, and
keep to them. It is not easy to get out of
trials after rushing into them of one’s own
accord.
5. Try to be unselfish. So long as a man
thinks and acts for others rather than for
himself he will be pure. Impurity is self-
indulgence in a bad form.
6. Pray daily. 11 Lead us not into


temptation, but deliver us from the evil.”—
The Lord's Prayer.
7- Use the means of grace and spiritual life
God offers you.
“ He that soweth to his flesh, shall of the
flesh reap corruption, But he that soweth to the
Spirit shall of the Spirit reap Life Everlasting.”
— Gal. vi. 7, 8.
Holy Communion. “ This do in remembrance
of Me.” —Luke xxii. ig.
“ Grant us, therefore, gracious Lord, so
to eat the flesh of Thy dear Son Jesus Christ,
and to drink His blood, that our sinful bodies
may be made clean by His Body, and our souls
washed through His most precious Blood.”
Book of Common Prayer.
WHEN TEMPTED.
1. Instant flight is your best chance.
Directly an impure fancy takes you, change
your place or occupation instantly. Get
some hard work or exercise at once, if
possible.
2. If obliged to stay where you must hear or
see foul things, set a strict guard on your
senses till you can get away. Don’t look,
don’t listen, keep silence, don’t laugh.


IF YOU ARE GIVING WAY.
x. “ Resist beginnings, all too late the cure,
When ills have gathered strength by long
delay.”
2. Call to mind the presence of God. Repeat
to yourself several times —
“ Thou God seest me ; ” or
“ How can I do this great wickedness, and
sin against God ? ” or,
“ By Thy Cross and Precious Blood, good
Lord, deliver me;” or,
“ Lead me not into temptation, but deliver
me from the evil.”
AFTER A FALL.
i. Never despair, or give in. Don't go from
bad to worse.
“ I hold it true with him who sings—
That men may rise on stepping stones
Of their dead selves, to higher things.”
— Tennyson.
2. Confess your sin to God at once ; pray for
pardon and strength ; renew your resolve ;
try again.


IF YOU WANT ADVICE.
For the health of your body.
On no account consult doctors who ad-
vertise. They are generally ignorant men,
impostors, who get money out of their
dupes by working upon their fears.
Regular practitioners, physicians, or , sur-
geons will give you good and kind advice, if
you treat them with confidence, and tell the
truth about your case. If you keep back the
truth you won’t get rid of your trouble.
For the health of your soul.
“ If there be any of you who cannot quiet
his own conscience, but requireth further
comfort or counsel, let him come to some
discreet and learned minister of God’s Word,
and_ open his grief; that by the ministry of
God’s Holy Word he may receive the benefit
of absolution, together with ghostly {i.e.,
spiritual) counsel and advice, to the quieting
of his conscience, and avoiding of all scruple
and doubtfulness.”— -Booh of Common Prayer
PRAY FOR HELP AND STRENGTH.
Learn the following Collect by heart, and
pray it often.


GOD, I most humbly pray Thee to give
W me a heart made clean from all stain of
evil, that I may be pure in thought, word and
deed, unto my life’s end.
Make me strong to hold out when I am
tempted to go wrong, and strong to help
others who are weaker or younger than
myself. Forgive all my past sins, and by
Thy Spirit kindle in me the love of all that
is pure on earth and holy in Heaven, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.


Extract from Speech at Meerut, in
1888, by FIELD-MARSHAL EARL
ROBERTS, V.C., K.G., K.P., G.C.8.,
etc., etc.
There is one subject closely connected with
Temperance which I should like to mention.
I allude to the use of foul language which
is so frequently to be heard issuing from
drunken lips, and, I am sorry to say, very
often from sober ones also . . .
I am quite certain, —and I speak now not so
much from my own experience, as from what
non-commissioned officers and men have
frequently told me,-—that only a small
minority of the men in the ranks are inclined
to make use of such language as now
unfortunately prevails in many a barrack
room. Like dram-drinking, or anything else
that is wrong, bad and obscene language is
generally the result of habit. A recruit hears
an older man than himself utter an oath with
every sentence he delivers, and thinks it a
fine thing to follow his example ; the habit
grows upon him until at last, poor lad.


blasphemy flows from his lips without his
noticing it, or indeed having the least idea
of what he is talking about.
Ew _ man who wears the Queen’s uniform
should remember that he belongs to a noble
service, and he should endeavour to conduct
himself at ail times in a manner which will not
bring discredit upon it. Decency in speech
and conduct belong to that self-respect
which every soldier should do his best to
cultivate ....
It rests with you, men, to bring about the
reform lam so anxious for. If you will all
band together and let it be clearly under-
stood that foul language is bad form
there would soon be a change for the better.
I call upon all good soldiers, officers, non-
commissioned officers and men, to take this
to heart, and do their best to put a stop to a
practice which is degrading in the extreme,
and to relieve our service from a reproach
which goes far to tarnish the lustre of its
brilliant reputation.


WHITE CROSS LEAGUE,
7, DEAN’S YARD, WESTMINSTER ABBEY, S.W.
If you are tempted to impurity use the folio-wing
prayer:
GOD, I most humbly pray Thee to give
me a heart made clean from all stain of
evil, that I may be pure in thought,
word, and deed unto my life’s end.
Make me strong to hold out when I am
tempted to go wrong, and strong to help others
who are weaker or younger than myself. For-
give all my past sins, and by Thy Spirit
kindle in me the love of all that is pure on
earth and holy in Heaven, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.
THE “WHITE CROSS OBLIGATIONS.”
I. To treat all women with respect, and endeavour to
protect them from wrong and degradation.
2. To endeavour to put down all indecent language and
coarse jests.
3. —To maintain the law of purity as equally binding on
men and women.
4. —To endeavour to spread these principles among my
companions, and to try and help my younger brothers.
5. To use every possible means to fulfil the command,
“Keep THYSELF pure.”
N.B.—These obligations are binding upon every baptized
Christian, whether he recognizes them or not.


PUBLICATIONS OF THE SOCIETY.
PAPERS FOR MEN, Price One Penny each.
Postage axtea.
Mo. I.—Letter of Warning to a Lad .. .. Anon.
Mo. IL—Yens? Duty .. .. Lt.-Col. H. Everitt.
Mo. lll.—Christian Marriage .. .. Lt.-Col. H. Everitt.
Mo. 'The Perils of Impurity F. Le Gros Clark, F R.S.
'Mo. • ¥l.—■The Testimony Of Medical Men Arthur T. Barnett
Mo. ¥ll.—-Life .. .. .. .. •• Rev. E Tbring.
No, Vlll.—True Manliness .. .. •• •• .. J.E.H.
Ho, IX.—Damaged Pearls.. .. .. Ellice Hopkins.
Mo. X.—Lost In Quicksand • • • - ■ • ■ - JE. H.
No. XI.—A Brother’s Advice .. .. Arthur T. Barnett.
No. Xll.—Man m Beast ? .. • • ■ ■ Lt.-Col. H Everitt.
Mo. Xlll.—Marriage Arthur T. Barnett.
Is. Xl¥.-The national Flag .. .. •• Ellice Hopkins.
So. X¥.—Moral Training of Children.. .. R. Arthur, M.D.
No. X¥l—The Great Struggle .. •• Bishop Moorhnuse.
Mo. X¥lll.—Married Life .. Rev. Canon Hon. E Lyttelton.
Mo. XlX.—The Greeley Expedition .. .. Ellice Hopkins.
Ho. XX.—Purity the Guard of Manhood .. .. J.E.H.
(A Confirmation Paper.)
MAMSSRS MAKETH MAM. Price 6d., postage IJd.
THE BLANCO BOOK. Price 6d. nett, postage 2d.
PALLING BIRTHBATB. Price 6d„postage Id. Lt.-Col. H. Everitt.
*5 MOTHER’S PART. Price 2d. .. M. P.
INTERCESSIONS AMD PRAYERS. Price 23.
THE MARRIAGE QHBSfION. Price 2d.
The Most Rev. The Archbishop of York.
KEEP THYSELF PURE. Price 2d.
SHORT PAPERS (Prle© £d. each), postage Id. for
12 copies.
Power to Let. i Moral Bangers in oar Schools
LEAFLETS (2s. per 100), postage Id. for 25 espies.
Manhood’s Danger. The ¥ery House CHRIST
A Doctor’s Talk with Lads, Is it Manly? Lived In.
Words of Warning. Wild Oats.
Helps to Parity. This Hill is Dangerous.
Seeing Life. A Woman’s Appeal.
Canterbury Leaflets for Moral Life of our Boys and
Parents Girls.
“THE WHITE CEOSS.”
Quarterly Paper of the White Cross League. 6d, a year, post free.
Orders should be addressed to the Secretary, White Cross League,
7, Dean’s Yard, Westminster Abbey, S.W., and accompanied by
remittance, including postage.
of Literature for Women, by other publishers, are also
on view at the League’s Offices.
Members and Associates are entitled to 25 per cent: discount off the
League’s Literature.
