

YOUTH
UNITE
Resolution of the Sixth
World Congress of the
Young Communist International
PRICE ONE PENNY


The Tasks of the United Front
of the Youth
'J'HE life of the younger genera-
tion of toilers in the capitalist
countries has lately deteriorated to
an unheard-of degree, and it still
continues to worsen. The over-
whelming majority of the youth
are now a ruthlessly oppressed and
exploited generation.
What characterises at the pre-
sent time the life of the large sec-
tions of the toiling youth?
Mass unemployment, an ever-
growing number of youth who
never worked, and who generally
never had an opportunity to learn
a trade, fierce exploitation of those
employed in industry; impoverish-
ment of the peasant youth, denial
of the political rights to the youth,
and their rights to a civilised life;
sharply curtailed possibilities of se-
curing a general or a special edu-
cation; loss of any prospects; des-
truction of the normal healthy
life of the youth, spreading hobo-
ism, prostitution and begging.
The Fascist system of forced
labor and militarisation is being
ever more widely applied in the
capitalist countries. Fascism is
brutally annihilating the best ele-
ments of the revolutionary youth
and at the same time trying to
utilise for its own reactionary ends
the profoundly growing dissatisfac-
tion of toiling youth with the pre-
sent conditions of life, and their
growing urge for militant action.
Inciting the youth of one nation-
ality against those of another,
Fascism fans chauvinism and is
trying to inculcate its mad “race
theory” into the minds of the
youth.
Relying on the Fascists and
other reactionary parties, the big
bourgeoisie are seeking to convert
Itihe young gteneration into an
obedient tool of their class and
imperialist policies.
Fascism means war. It menaces
the independence of the weak
nations (the war of Italian
Fascism against Abyssinia), in-
tensifies imperialist oppression in
the colonial and semi-colonial
countries and directs its military
provocations (German Fascism)
especially against the Soviet
Union. Fascism is preparing
another monstrous catastrophe
which brings death to millions of
the youth.
At the same time, however, there is
a growing youth movement against
Fascism, imperialist war, and capitalist
exploitation. Ever larger sections of the
youth belonging to the various organisa-
tions, regardless of nationality, or re-
ligious belief, are anxiously seeking a
way to improve their life, are beginning
to defend their rights, and are entering
the struggle for their interests, for free-
dom and for peace.
The forces of the youth, however, are
scattered and consequently their fight
does not lead to decisive success. All
experience shows that the youth can-
not successfully defend their interests
without uniting their forces on the side
of the working class and the entire
toiling population to fight the common
enemy, Fascism and imperialism.
I.—THE NECESSITY FOR A
CHANGE IN THE
CHARACTER OF THE
YOUTH LEAGUES.
1. The cause of the toiling
youth imperatively * demands
their unification in genuine
class, non-party youth organisa


tions, consisting not only of
Communist, but also Socialist
and non-party, national revolu-
tionary, pacifist, religious, and
other sections of the youth or-
ganisations which would, to-
gether with the daily attention
towards economic, political, and
cultural interests and rights of
the toiling youth, educate their
members in the spirit of the class
war, proletarian internationalism,
Marxism-Leninism.
The creation of such genuine mass
youth organisations of a new type re-
quires a radical reorganisation of the
Young Communist Leagues and a com-
plete abandonment of any form of sec-
tarian copying of the Parties.
All the vital interests of the younger
generation of toilers, the most diver-
sified, healthy requirements of the youth
and not abstract politics should deter-
mine the substance and the life of the
youth organisations. The work of these
organisations should be adapted en-
tirely to the desires and requirements of
the youth themselves, so that while
learning, organising and fighting for
the vital interests of the toiling classes,
the youth would become educated in the
spirit of the fight for freedom, for So-
cialism, against reaction, against Fas-
cism, against imperialist war.
2. The doors of these youth organi-
sations must be wide open for the entire
working-class youth, for the young pea-
sants, the students and other youth who
sincerely and loyally wish to participate
in their work.
All the work of these organisations
should be built on the basis of wide de-
mocracy. The members of the organisa-
tions should have full power to decide
in a democratic way the tasks, the forms
of work, and the character of their or-
ganisations; . they should be given guid-
ance by means of example and convic-
tion, and not by orders from above. The
demands advanced by the leaders to the
rank and file members, especially to
new ones, both as regards work and
■ discipline, should be adapted to the
mass character of the youth organisa-
tions, and should not be the same as
the demands advanced to members of
some sect. The high demands which
are usually put to Party members should
not to be exacted from the youth.
Independence and the non-party
character of the youth organisations
does not exclude the establishment of
permanent contact of these organisa-
tions with the revolutionary vanguard
of the proletariat, the Communist
Parties. On the contrary, it is in the
interests of the toilers that this be done.
The Congress deems it an exceedingly
Important task to convince all members
of that, and also of the necessity of
the youth international being associated
with the Communist International.
3. The organisational forms of the
youth leagues cannot be the same for
all countries, all regions or cities. They
must always coincide with the concrete
conditions and specific tasks of the
youth movement. The most essential
forms of organisation of youth leagues
are all kinds of clubs and circles satis-
fying the cultural, economic, profes-
sional and political interests of the
youth and also local societies, courses,
residential groups, groups of unem-
ployed, young peasants, girls, students,
etc.
II—FOR UNITY OF THE
WORKING YOUTH
1. In seeking to rally all the
toiling youth, the Congress con-
siders efforts to bring about or-
ganic unity with the Young So-
cialist Leagues to be the primary
task of the Young Communist
Leagues.
This unity is Justified by the fact that
the Socialist youth also occupy an anti-
Fasclst position, and are equally in-
terested in improving the life of the
youth, in freedom, in peace and in
striving towards Socialism.
There is not the slightest justification
for a continuation of the division in
the ranks of the working youth. The
uniting of these two leagues, which at
the present time are, in most countries,
small organisations, isolated from the
masses, will not only double their moni


bership, but will render them an ex-
tremely powerful force of attraction for
the broad masses of the toiling youth.
2. The chief hindrance to the direct
unity of the organisations of the Com-
munist and Socialist youth comes from
the leaders of most parties of the So-
cialist International, who act as guard-
ians to the Socialist youth movement,
and who, basing themselves on a cer-
tain section of the leading functionaries
of the Socialist youth, try to fetter any
free initiative of their members in the
matter of unity.
In order to clear the path to this
unity, the Y.C.L. organisations must
exert every effort to establish fraternal
relations with the organisations of the
Socialist youth and work especially for
bringing about the united front of the
youth in practice.
The Y S.L.’s and Young Socialist or-
ganisations of Prance, Spain and Aus-
tria showed by their joint activity that
the united front is not only necessary
but possible. They have smashed forever
the slanderous charges made by the
enemies of the united front to the ef-
fect that unity of action is a
“manoeuvre” directed against the So-
cialist organisations. The united front
is the chief weapon for repulsing the
Fascist offensive.
The Congress recommends all organi-
sations affiliated to the Y.C.I. to seek
united front agreements with the So-
cialist youth in defence of the interests
of the toiling youth, working out jointly
with their organisations the basis and
plan of joint action on a local and na-
tional scale, on separate questions as
well as on the basis of common plat-
forms. This is the best method of
hastening and ensuring the unification
of the youth.
In all cases it is necessary to make
a most careful study and to take stock
of the concrete conditions and practical
occasions for joint struggle and also the
sentiments of the members of the So-
cialist organisations. In places where
the Socialist youth leagues put forward
demands or organise activity correspon-
ding to the interests of the tolling
youth, the members of our organisations
must give them active support and do
everything to secure the granting of
their demands.
It is also necessary together with the
Socialist youth to appeal to the Social-
ist and Communist members of Parlia-
ment and to present demands to Social-
Democratic ministers (wherever such
are in office) for the passing of laws
and decrees to improve the situation of
the youth.
3. While widely developing the united
front movement, it is necessary, in the
interests of the common fight, to bring
about constant co-operation between the
two leagues through the creation of
joint associations. Taking as a starting
point the experience of the “co-ordina-
tion committees” in France and the “al-
liance committees” in Spain, it is neces-
sary to set up various anti-Pascist as-
sociations of the Communist and So-
cialist youth leagues.
When such associations are formed,
the leagues remain independent and
may maintain their connections with
their respective parties and interna-
tionals.
4. In a number of countries, such as
France, Spain, Austria, Latvia, and some
others, the practical prerequisites for
uniting the two leagues into a single Or-
ganisation already exist.
A necessary condition for the forma-
tion and development of united or-
ganisations is the full democratic right
of the members themselves to settle the
question of the basis of unity (the plat-
form of further struggle against capi-
talist exploitation, Fascism, imperialist
war, for the vital interests of the youth)
—as well as the connections of the
united leagues with the parties and the
question of adherence to an interna-
tional.
The Young Communist International
will give the most practical help to bring
about the formation of united leagues
of the toiling youth in any country. At
the same time, the Young Communist
International announces its firm deter-
mination to fight for the unification of
the revolutionary yputh throughout the
world, for the formation of a single
youth international.


III.—UNITY OF THE FORCES
OF THE ENTIRE GEN-
ERATION OF YOUNG
TOILERS.
1. The distressed situation of
the vast majority of the younger
generation and the increasing
urge to struggle for their inter-
ests raises as an urgent task
the uniting of the forces of all
the non-Fascist youth organisa-
tions in a joint struggle for free-
dom, peace, and the rights of
the younger generation.
The sections of the Young Communist
International in France and the U.S.A.
have understood the tremendous im-
portance of this task. This is shown by
their active participation in the wide
united front movement of the youth
which Is taking place in these countries.
The success of the movement in these
countries only became possible thanks to
the fact that the youth from the most
varied mass organisations were drawn
into the discussion and elaboration of
a common platform of co-operation.
There is no doubt that there exist
also in many other countries extensive
possibilities for the development of such
a movement of the younger generation.
However, in some countries (Canada,
Great Britain and Switzerland), the
sections of the Young Communist In-
ternational have taken only the first
steps in this direction, while in the
majority of countries even this has not
yet been done. In many countries the
members of our leagues do hot under-
stand the problems arising before the
younger generation and have in general
adopted a narrow sectarian approach
to the young people in the youth organi-
sations formed by the bourgeoisie, ■ simp-
ly regarding these organisations and
their members as opponents. In some
cases, our leagues have tried to force
upon the broad masses of the youth and
their organisations a stereotyped, ready-
made platform, prepared without con-
sultation with the Vouth of other organ-
isations.
2. “The Young Communist League
must strive in every way to unite the
forces of all the non-Fascist mass
youth organisations to the point of
forming various kinds of joint organi-
sations for the light against Fascism,
against the unparalleled oppression
and militarisation of the youth, for the
economic and cultural rights of the
younger generation, for drawing these
young workers to the side of the anti-
Fascist front, no matter where they
are to be found —in the factories, the
forced labor camps, the labor ex-
changes, the barracks, the navy, in
schools, various sport, cultural and
other organisations.”— (Dimitrov).
While working with all energy and
initiative to carry out this extremely
important task, it should be firmly re-
membered that the platform and also
the forms and methods of co-operation,
must be worked out in the most demo-
cratic manner, taking into consideration
the cultural and political level, especially
the questions of the youth of the given
country, and the burning questions
which interest various sections of the
youth. Special attention should be paid
in this connection to work among the
peasant youth and the students.
3. In the fight for the uniting of the
youth against reaction and Fascism, it.
is essential for all members of the
leagues to completely eliminate sec-
tarian methods of approach to the broad,
sections of the youth. It is undoubtedly
necessary that they should learn to-
speak in the vivid language of the youth
and once and for all to give up re-
peating stock phrases.
It is particularly important in the
ideological fight against Fascism to take
into account the revolutionary and de-
mocratic traditions of one’s own people,
not in the slightest degree adopting a.
contemptuous attitude to the national
feelings of the youth, but at the same-
time fighting tirelessly against chauvin-
ism and working to educate the youth in.
the spirit of proletarian internationalism-
Having in view the democratic tradi-
tions, it is essential to protect all de-
mocratic rights against Fascism, and to
fight against any oppressive measures;
against the youth and for their econo-
mic, cultural and democratic rights.
In every place where Fascist dema-
gogues put forward slogans and pro


mises which correspond to the feelings
and demands of the toiling youth, we
must propose without hesitation that the
youth should insist on these promises
being immediately carried out, and must
begin an independent mass struggle to
bring them into practice.
4. The Congress slates that the
Young Communist International will
give every possible support to the youth
movement against Fascism and war in
any country. The Y.C.I. will also give
active support to the movement directed
towards the organisation of a world
meeting and the establishment of con-
stant international collaboration among
the progressive youth.
IV.—THE TASKS OF THE
MASS YOUTH MOVE-
MENT IN FASCIST
COUNTRIES.
1. The Congress sets before all
the revolutionary organisations of
the youth which are fighting in
Fascist countries the task of
passing from the system of
small circles and general agita-
tion to direct legal and semi-
legal mass activity. It is not
correct to imagine that there
are no legal possibilities in coun-
tries with a Fascist dictatorship
for the development of a mass
movement of struggle for the
vital interests of the youth.
Vast numbers of the youth in these
countries have voluntarily or by compul-
sion been brought into the Fascist
mass youth organisations. It is possible
and necessary within these organisa-
tions to develop the wide Independent
activity of the youth. A significant
part of these youth still believe in the
false ideals given them by Fascism and
in the Fascist leaders. But on the other
hand, the bitter reality of their lives
and the fact that their needs and de-
mands are not being satisfied gives rise
to discontent and activity which is not
yet directed against the Fascist re-
gime but is primarily in defence of their
direct interests and requirements.
Our task is not to issue general ap-
peals for the overthrow of the Fascist
leadership, but to be able to defend
the day to day demands and needs of
the youth, to support and unite them
on this basis, utilising all legal and
semi-legal possibilities and subordinat-
ing the work of the illegal organisations
to this task. It is essential for the youth
themselves to be roused to stubbornly
demand the fulfilment of the promises
which Fascism gave them so that they
will in this way be led up to a real fight
against Fascism.
2. All the mass forms and measures
of Fascist work among the youth must
be made use of with the aim of rallying
the forces of the youth to the struggle
for their interests, and this makes it
necessary to begin suitable forms of
work in all the Fascist youth mass
organisations and also in the trade
unions, in every way supporting and en-
couraging opposition sentiment among
the members of these organisations,
seeking to isolate the conscious agents
of Fascism.
Wherever there is oppositional senti-
ment or democratic, liberal and radical
youth circles and groups, as in Poland,
Jugoslavia, Bulgaria, Austria, etc., it is
necessary to work for the establishment
of youth organisations absolutely inde-
pendent of Fascism, and for united ac-
tion with them.
Wherever Fascism prohibits and sup-
presses the non-Fascist youth organisa-
tions, our first task is la give friendly
support to their struggle, for the free-
dom and independence of their. organi-
sations. It is at the same time neces-
sary to work with them for the amal-
gamation of all forces of the youth.
V.—THE TASKS OF THE
YOUTH IN THE
TRADE UNION MOVE-
MENT.
The Congress of the Y.C.I.
notes with alarm that only an
insignificant section of the
working youth are organised in
trade unions and that the rising
younger generation of toilers is
not being educated and steeled
in the ranks of the trade union
movement in the spirit of mili-
tant class solidarity and devotion
to the cause of the working class.


Yet the fight for the economic and
cultural interests of the youth and
also the fight against the spreading of
Fascist influence among the youth, can-
not be successful without the aid of the
trade unions. That is precisely why it
is necessary to work for the organisation
of all young workers in the trade unions
and the arrangement of diverse forms of
work among the large sections of the
youth inside the trade unions.
The Congress calls upon all young
workers who support the Young Com-
munist International to join the unions,
to take active part in the work and to
fight for trade union unity, to win by
their good work the respect of their fel-
low-trade union members. Considering
the fact to be important that in some
countries, as in Austria and Belgium,
for example, some unions have begun to
organise the young workers, the Con-
gress urgently recommends to all sec-
tions of the Y.C.I. actively to support
any propaganda and organisational steps
not only of the Red, but also of the
Amsterdam and other unions to recruit
the young workers.
It is exceedingly important to work
with the'trade unions for gaining work
and for social insurance for the young
unemployed. It is essential to work for
concrete aids to the unemployed youth
and especially to the girls, by or-
ganising all kinds of vocational courses,
lodgings, night shelters, special work-
shops and clubs for girls. Work among
the youth in the various kinds of labor
camps is of particular importance at
the present time.
VI.—THE TASKS OF THE
UNITED FRONT IN
THE SPORT MOVE-
MENT.
The Congress emphasises the
importance of developing a sport
movement of the youth, indepen-
dent of the bourgeois State, and
calls upon the sections of the
T.C.I. actively to co-operate in
the unification of the worker
sport organisations in every
country and in bringing about
international unity of the work-
ers’ sport movement. However
it should be borne in mind that
the workers’ sport movement in
most countries, even the united
organisations, have in their ranks
only a minority of the young
toiling sportsmen. It is therefore
necessary to take active part in
bringing about co-operation and
even an amalgamation of all
sport organisations in which
large numbers of young toilers
are to be found.
While participating in the mass sport
organisations in Fascist countries it is
necessary to fight aganst chauvinist
and military propaganda of the Fascists
among the sportsmen. The fight of the
masses of sportsmen for their immedi-
ate demands should be assisted and
given leadership.
One of the most important immediate
tasks in co-operating with the large mas-
ses of young sportsmen is to carry on a
joint fight against carrying out the
Olympic Games in Fascist Germany
in 1936.
VII.—PARTICIPATION OF
THE YOUTH IN THE
ANTI-IMPERIALIST
PEOPLE’S FRONT.
A most important and imme-
diate task in the colonial and
semi-colonial countries is the
formation of a powerful youth
movement on the basis of com-
bating illiteracy among the
younger generation, 'for the
freedom of national culture, for
healthier and better conditions
of life and work, for democratic
rights and liberties, against op-
pression, slavery, and exploita-
tion.
With this in view, the organisations
affiliated to the Y.C.I. must establish
closer relations with all mass youth or-
ganisations, especially with the nation-
al-revolutionary and national reformist
organisations. Co-operating with these
and other mass youth organisations, al-
lowing for the differences existing be-
tween the diverse strata of the youth in
the various districts of one and the same
country, it is necessary to create various
types of peasant, Indian, Negro, student,
women’s, cultural, sporting, and other
youth organisations for the sake of an
amalgamation of the forces of the


younger generation on the basis of a
wide platform of struggle in the in-
terests of the toiling youth, and also to
broaden and unite such organisations
wherever they are to be found.
The task of drawing the youth into
the anti-imperialist people’s front de-
mands that work be commenced on the
establishment of a new type of mass
youth organisation of a national-libera-
tion character which would include the
widest possible strata of the youth and
the national-revolutionary and national-
reformist organisations, in place of the
narrow political groups, isolated from
the basic masses. These organisations
should carry on acfivity not only in the
cities, but where tht basic masses of the
peasant youth are. They must organise
their work so as to satisfy all the es-
sential requirements and demands of the
youth and educate them in the spirit
of revolutionary hatred for the imperia-
list oppressors, in the spirit of devotion
to the cause of emancipation of their own
people from any form of exploitation
and slavery.
The most important task in China
is to create a mass movement of the
entire youth and their organisations to
fight for better living conditions for the
toiling youth, for a higher cultural level,
for democratic freedom, and in order to
secure greater active participation of the
youth in the fight of the people to save
the country from imperialist invaders.
VIII.—AGAINST FASCISM,
FOR SOCIALISM, FOR
A FREE AND HAPPY
LIFE OF THE TOIL-
ING YOUTH.
The Congress of the Young
Communist International greets
with pride and joy the final and
irrevocable victory of Socialism
in the land of the Soviets. A
happy Socialist future is wide
open before the youth of the
Soviet Union. At the bottom of
their education lies Stalin’s great
idea of solicitude for the human
being.
Under the wise leadership of Stalin,
the great teacher and best friend of the
young toilers of the world, under the
leadership of the Bolshevik Party, the
youth of the Soviet Union are marching
from victory to victory in the struggle
for the upbuilding of a classless Socialist
society, which knows no exploitation of
man by man.
The land of Soviets, carrying into life
the revolutionary tenets of Marx, Engels,
Lenin, Stalin, has become an invincible
stronghold of the international prole-
tariat in the fight for freedom and
peace.
It is the task of the youth leagues to
popularise widely the achievements of
Socialist construction in the Soviet
Union and to rally the youth to the sup-
port of the peace policy of the U.S.S.B.
and to its defence against world im-
perialism.
Fascism is preparing an attack on the
land of peace and labor, and brings the
greatest menace to the toilers of all
countries. Htowever, notwithstanding
the painful difficulties and hard living
conditions in the Fascist countries, as in
all capitalist countries, the forces are
growing which shatter the domination
of the bourgeoisie. “The relation of
class forces on a world scale is steadily
changing in favor of the growing forces
of the revolution.” —(From the resolu-
tions of the Seventh Congress of the
Communist International.
The following words, uttered by the
fearless fighter of Fascism, Comrade
Dimitrov, should guide the struggle of
the whole revolutionary youth:—
“We want to find a common lan-
guage with the broad masses in order
to fight against the class enemy, to
find the path by which we can finally
' end the isolation of the revolutionary
vanguard from the masses of the pro-
letariat and all the toilers, and by
which we can put an end to the fatal
isolation of the working class itself
from its natural allies in the fight
against the bourgeoisie, against
Fascism.”
Our path was pointed out by the
helmsman of the Communist Interna-
tional, Dimitrov. It is a path of con-
solidation and organisation on the
basis of a wide united front of all forces
of the younger generation of tollers.
We consecrate all our forces to the
salvation of the youth from Fascism
and the danger of imperialist war, and
to the fight for a free, joyful, and happy
life of the youth.


Printed by The Forward Press Ltd., 175-
7 Campbell Street, Surry Hills, Sydney.
