

u t c J cf /• e,,
I“' r Y . *(
I.
v / ~ /"w v v
I | •••J^““f r ‘-
1Qr..G;...1.{?.
Youthful Assays.
CASTE.
“ The rank is but the guinea’s stamp,
The man's the gowd for a’ that.”— Burns.
IT is well known to my readers that the word “ Caste ” comes from
*■ India, where it was first used by the Portuguese to express the
distinctive station in society of the various classes of the natives who
inhabit that populous country. But India is not the only place where
caste prevails. Go where you will—to any part of the civilized world
—and you will find that the vanity of men has created, and strenuously
endeavours to maintain, certain false and artificial standards, by which
they judge themselves and others, without reference to intrinsic merit.
To begin with the country in which these distinctions had been, and
still are, stronger, perhaps, than in any other, we find that for at least
3,000 years, and probably for a still longer period, the labouring class
in India has been separated from the higher and wealthier ranks, not
simply by a line of demarcation, but by a wide and impassable gulf.
The Indian labourers, who compose the immense majority of the popu-
lation, are called Sudras ; and some idea may be given of the extreme
contempt in which they are held by their superiors, when it is stated
that, by the native laws, as embodied in the Institutes of Menu, if a
Sudra dared to occupy the same seat as those of higher degree, he was
either to be exiled or to suffer a painful and ignominious punishment;
“if he spoke of them with contempt, his mouth was to be burnt; if
he actually insulted them, his tongue was to be slit; if he sat on the
same carpet with a Brahmin, he was to be maimed for life ; if, moved
by the desire for instruction, he even listened to the reading of the
sacred book, burning oil was to be poured into his ears ; if, however,
he committed them to memory, ho was to be killed ; if he were guilty
of a crime, the punishment for it was greater than that inflicted on his
superiors ; but if he himself were murdered, the penalty was the same
as for killing a oat or a crow.”


When we see such hateful tyranny as this exercised by men over
their fellow-mortals, we may well exclaim with Shakespeare—
"Oil I but man, proud man I
Brest in a little brief authority—
Most ignorant of what he's most assured.
His glassy essence—like an angry ape,
Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven
As make the angels weep."
But, turning from this sickening spectacle of human presumption,
engendered by wealth and folly, and nurtured by ignorance, let us
contemplate the operation of the same spirit of caste in a less odious
form, as exemplified in the curious distinctions drawn by a Eoman
philosopher between those trades and professions which he calls
honorable and those which he terms ignoble.
“ First,” says Cicero, “we must disapprove of all those who
necessarily incur the hatred of mankind—as custom receivers and
usurers. The pursuits of all hired workmen who sell, not their art,
but their labour, are base and sordid; for their wages itself is the hire
of servitude. Those are also to be accounted ignoble who buy from
merchants what they immediately sell again ; for, unless they lie very
much, they can make no profit—and nothing is more vile than false-
hood. All mechanics are employed in an ignoble art; nor can a work-
shop contain anything liberal. But those whose occupations minister
to our pleasures are to be accounted the lowest of all—such as fish-
mongers, butchers, cooks, poulterers, and fishermen.” Cicero con-
sidered the professions of a physician and of an architect honorable.
All trade in a small way was, in his opinion, ignoble ; but if engaged
in on a large scale, “without the use of falsehood,” it was not to be
disparaged. His ideas on this point coincide with those held by some
of the “upper ten thousand” even in the present day. If a merchant,
having made a reasonable fortune, withdraws from Lis countinghouse
to a country residence, Cicero considers him worthy of praise and com-
mendation. But he reserves the highest encomiums for the pursuit
of agriculture, “than which,”he says, “nothing is better, nothing is
more fruitful, nothing more pleasant, nothing more worthy of a free
man.” Fancy one of our merchant princes withdrawing from trade as
soon as he had amassed money sufficient to enable him to turn to the
more honourable occupation of a tiller of the soil! If Cicero, who
was, on the whole, a man of large and liberal mind, were living now,
and had read Carlyle’s noble eulogy of work, he would doubtless
regard all who are engaged in honest labour as equally “honorable.”
It is somewhat singular that, while among the Ilomans mechanical
occupations were despised as ignoble, among the Jews if a father, even
though he were a wealthy man, neglected to teach his son a useful
trade, he was thought to have neglected one of his most important
parental duties. I need hardly point out how the custom of the Jews
m this particular ensured to men the means of livelihood in spite of
the vicissitudes of fortune, and tended to strengthen that feeling of
independence natural to those who know that, even though their riches
should take to themselves wings and fly away, they still possess know-
ledge and skill, which will prevent them from sinking to the depths of
poverty.


It was owingjto the spirit of caste, and the contempt 'with which
the French nobility, frivolous and empty as they were, looked down
upon the Tiers Etat, who were in reality the very life and strength of
the nation, that the latter were, before the revolution, excluded from
all places of honor in the army and navy. This degradation of the
people was one of the causes of that tremendous outburst of popular
resentment which taught the aristocracy so terrible a lesson. Happily
the English —a nation of shopkeepers, as they have been disdainfully
termed by their neighbours across the water —have always paid
comparatively little regard to rank when separated from merit. Ever
since the shock given to Conservative principles by Cromwell and his
sturdy Ironsides, the genius of the English people has been expanding
and developing; the English aristocracy have, to a groat extent,
realized the truth, that to make them honorable ] among men mere
length of pedigree, mere nobility of extraction, is altogether
insufficient; and they know that, if they wish even to keep their
present political position, they must show some of that energy and
ability which has acquired for the middle classes the power they now
possess.
Space will not permit pne to'treat my subject .at any great
length, but we may rest satisfied that the spirit of caste goes hand in
hand with ignorance and imbecility. It is altogether opposed to
progress, and is certainly in direct antagonism to the religion of Him
who was cradled in a manger, whose father was a carpenter, and who
chose His apostles from among fishermen and mechanics. As
knowledge advances, men will learn to reserve exclusively for virtue
and ability that respect and veneration which has been too often
prostituted to titled fools.
Yet I hope that it will not be thought, fromjany of the preceding
remarks,jthat I advocate total equality of rank and station among
mankind. The distinctive grades of society should no doubt, to some
extent, be preserved : and, naturally enough, the rich, the refined, the
industrious, the philosophical, the learned, the vulgar, and the poor,
will respectively associate with those of their own class, rather than
with others. But I would earnestly deprecate that spirit of un-
reasoning pride, or of silly vanity, which looks with scorn on men of
low degree, forgetting that all mortals arc of one common nature.
“ Under ground
Precedency’s a jest; vassal and lord
Grossly familiar, side by side consume.
When self-esteem, or others’ adulation,
Would cunningly persuade us we are something
Above the common level of our kind,
The grave gainsays the smooth-complexioned flattery,
And with blunt truth acquaints us what we are.”
In the march of civilization, intellect and energy lead the van, while
mere rank lags far behind. The time has gone by when the “ Divinity
that doth hedge a king ” was adored by Englishmen; “ vox roruu,
vox Dei ” is now the motto of advancodj thinkers ; and, whatever
doubts we may entertain of the present fitness of the English nation
for universal suffrage, this form of government must be established
before long. Even now, England is progressing" with rapid strides


towards the acquisition of perfect freedom. The education of the
lower ranks, the diffusion of the light of reason among those so long
held in darkness and subjection, will consummate the work commenced
by Hampden and Cromwell, and, with the inauguration of the reign
of liberty, the dominion of the few oyer the many will pass away for
ever. —June, 1871.
PHREHOLOGY.
all the sciences, real or pretended, which haye professed to be
able to estimate mental and moral capacity and inclination from
the form of the body, phrenology seems the most founded in reason.
It attaches value to the external shape of the skull only as indicating
the shape of the brain within. Nearly every one acknowledges that
the brain is the seat or instrument of thought. Common experience
confirms this idea. How often you hear the remark, “ Mr. B has a
food head on his shoulders,” or “ Mr. C is a long-headed fellow,” &c.
’ersons making these observations acknowledge, often without
meaning to do so, the primary principle of phrenology. From the
belief that the brain, considered -as a whole, is the organ of thought
and moral feeling, the step is not a great one to the idea that distinct
intellectual powers and distinct moral sentiments may spring from
the operation of organs in the brain having separate and distinct
functions. In support of this principle, particularly as regards
intellect, I again appeal to ordinary observation, Look at that man ;
you have never seen him before ; you know nothing of his mental
powers, and yet you are perfectly convinced that his low, pinched
forehead is not the abode of a largo and vigorous mind. You believe
this thoroughly, and yet, perhaps, the man lias a large brain. But the
part that is largo lies in the back of the head, and you feel, almost
intuitively, that that is not the place to look for intellect.
The founders of phrenology based their science on observation and
experiment. They pursued the inductive and not the deductive
method of inquiry. They did not go to work and construct on
metaphysical principles a complete system of mental and moral
philosophy, in which the intellectual powers and moral feelings were
analysed and reduced to their primitive elements. On the contrary,
they observed that certain faculties of the mind, and certain moral
sentiments, were exhibited in connection with particular conformations
of the skull; and they regarded these conformations as produced by
the development of individual organs. During a period of many
years, Gall and Spurzheim, and subsequently Combe, pursued their
investigations, and with great ability endeavoured to form a complete


system of phrenology. Other clever men have laboured with more or
less success in the same cause. Ido not intend to enter into the
details of their science, or further to discuss the probabilities in
favour of their principles, as my space will not permit me to do so.
But as many people wonder that phrenology has not lately made
greater advances, if it is really entitled to be called a science, I will
ask them to consider the great difficulties that impede its progress and
which will, perhaps, never be surmounted.
The first is a comparatively minor obstacle. It is presented by the
existence, in persons who are more than twelve years old, of a cavity
in the bone of that part of the skull directly above the nose which
covers the perceptive organs. This cavity is called the frontal sinus,
and as it varies in size in different persons is apt to mislead phrenolo-
gists in their measurements of the head. But a far greater difficulty
is that of ascertaining the quality of the brain. It is triumphantly
asserted by the opponents, and it must be admitted by the supporters
of phrenology, that, granting the connection between certain confor-
mations of brain and certain powers of intellect, everything does not
depend on the size of the organs. Quality must be taken into con-
sideration. A man with large perceptive and refiective organs may
have a weaker mind than another with a smaller hut more active
brain. Phrenologists meet this difficulty by a most ingenious theory
—that of the temperaments, These are mental, vital, and motive.
They all exist conjointly in every man, but the motive temperament
predominates in one, the vital in another, and the mental in a third.
Each temperament exercises a peculiar influence on the brain,
regulating its quality and power. Phrenologists say that the
temperament predominating in any individual is indicated by the
shape of the body, the colour and texture of the skin and hair, and
other external signs; and when discovered affords a basis from which
they can calculate the nature and power of the brain. But when to
the difficulty of ascertaining the exact shape of the brain, and the
difficulty of discovering the temperament, is added the impossibility
of constructing, cither from observation and experiment or from
metaphysical reasoning, an accurate science of the mental and moral
feelings which shall reduce them to their primitive elements, and
when so reduced shall clearly show the manner in which they act and
re-act on one another; and when we reflect that, in order to explain
the ultimate effect produced, their mutual action and re-action must
be considered as modified by temperament and surrounding circum-
stances, we surely cannot wonder that phrenology is at a standstill.
When science has done its utmost in analysing the faculties of the
mind, in measuring the brain, and in estimating the effect of tempera-
ment, education, and other disturbing causes, the final result can only
be an approximation to the truth, and sometimes not even that.
And perhaps it is just as well that it is so. Some people would feel
very uncomfortable, feel in fact as if they were mere machines, if
their characters and capacities could be accurately gauged by the
phrenologist, though they bear with complacency the vague idea that
the brain is, somehow, the seat of thought. It is possible these
intricate problems were never meant to b« solved by man. The


failure of metaphysicians in their attempts to explain the operations
of the mind, and the sudden check which phrenology has received,
seem to indicate that we must he content, in this life at least, to leave
unfathomed the dark and inscrutable mysteries of our being. In
all other directions human science is progressing rapidly and
triumphantly. Knowledge is ever growing, and thought is steadily
enlarging her domain; but while our researches in the external
world are crowned with glorious success, wo make but slow advances
in “the proper study of mankind;” and, notwithstanding all our
endeavours to carry it out, the old injunction “ know thyself ” will in
all probability never be fulfilled. —Sept., 1871.
RESIGNATION OR EXERTION?
of the most striking points in which the modern philosophy
of life differs from that of the ancients is the manner in which
it encounters misfortune and sorrow. The ancient philosophers
inculcated resignation. Their grand precept was, look upon sorrow
as inevitable ; you cannot hope to escape it, therefore when it comes
endure it with fortitude. But modern philosophy says, force your
way out of your trouble ; dissipate your sorrows by bettering your
position. “ Seneca said : ‘ Tutor your mind to such endurance as not
to feel the nettle’s sting.’ Bacon said: ‘ Put on your glove and pull
the sting out.’ ” The ancient philosophy of endurance and contempt
for sorrow contained much that was grand, noble, and elevating, but
most men found it quite impracticable. Even among those who
exerted all the powers of strong and well-balanced mmds in their
efforts to attain their ideal of philosophic indifference, there was
probably not one who could truthfully say to fortune, “ Thy wheel
and thee I neither love nor hate.” As long as sorrow was at a
distance they could talk of it disdainfully enough, and exult in their
fancied security; but when brought face to face with misfortune,
their feelings generally underwent change. How great the contrast
between the exalted sentiments of Cicero when, living in opulence and
honour and surrounded by all the comforts of a luxurious city, ho
inculcated the duty of preserving, under the most trying circum-
stances, that tranquillitatem animi which he prized so highly, and the
dolorous, impatient complaints of the same man when undergoing a
short and easy exile. It was all very well to say that a wise man should
regard sorrow and joy with equal indifference, but such wisdom existed
only in imagination. These attempts to raise men to superhuman
strength of mind failed most lamentably, because they were against
the laws of nature. Discontent, arising from misfortune and pain.


lias a most important part to perform in the drama of human life. It
is the mainspring of all progress, the incentive to all improvement.
If pain and suffering could he robbed of their efficacy by men merely
wrapping themselves in the mantle of stoical apathy, the world would
have long since come to a standstill. But the designs of nature were
not to be hindered by the idle dreams of philosophers ; so, whilst
these were trying to prove that pain is not an evil and that pleasure is
not a good, men still went on dreading the one and desiring the other,
until at last philosophy, seeing the vanity of its pretensions, suddenly
abandoned them and awoke to the conclusion that it had neglected
substantial advantages in the pursuit of visionary felicity. The con-
sequence was that a large amount of intellectual power which had
before been wasted in idle speculation was diverted into practical
channels, and men of genius and ability, instead of exerting their
ingenuity in the attempt to find fresh reasons for despising poverty,
hunger and pain, set themselves to find means by which these evils
might be lessened, and thus gave an unprecedented impetus to the
advancement of material prosperity.
But acknowledging—nay, asserting, as I do —the superiority of
modern to ancient philosophy in these respects, and fully admitting the
impossibility of putting into practice many of the precepts inculcated
by the wise men of old, I still venture to think that their voice might
on some occasions be listened to with advantage by the anxious and
careworn generation who are now hammering out their destinies “at
the flaming forge of life.” No doubt it is absurd to say, “ I care not
whether I meet with pain or pleasure in the world; I despise sorrow
and do not desire happiness because nature ordains that men shaU
be uncomfortable in misfortune, and thus incites them to overcome it
by their own exertions. But when every effort has been made, when
every nerve has boon strained, when every loophole has been tried, and
all to no purpose, then, though it is vain to hope that we can be made
happy by reflection and resolution, or dissipate sorrow by philosophical
maxims, these may still alleviate our condition to a considerable
degree. There are many reflections which undeniably tend to produce
a feeling, if not of content, at least of resignation, under unavoidable
misfortune, though of course their efficacy is regulated by the greatness
of the calamity and the temperament of the individual who seeks to
apply them to his own case. Some of the most powerful of these
sedatives are contained in homely proverbs and common aphorisms :
“It will be all the same in a hundred years “It might have been
much worse “ What cannot be cured must bo endured“ It is no
use crying over spilt milk “I am still better oil than many others.”
These and many similiar sentences contain some of the soundest
philosophy to be found in the writings of ancient sages.
The fox in iEsop’s fable furnishes an example worth following. He
spares no pains in his attempts to reach the grapes ; he exerts him-
self to the utmost; he leaps his very best, and when all his efforts
have failed he very wisely reflects that possibly the fruit is sour, and
this idea effectually consoles him. I have always thought him a pro-
found philosopher, which opinion is not at all weakened by the fact
that his genius was far too practical to allow him to seek consolation


in philosophy until perfectly assured that the object of his persistent
endeavours was unattainable. This is the true use of resignation. It
becomes a virtue only when exertion is of no avail. So long as a hope
exists that circumstances can be improved, men should strive their
utmost to bring about this result. It is no doubt a pity that as soon
as suffering becomes objectless, that is, as soon as the evil it accom-
panies becomes irremediable, the suffering does not cease of its own
accord. But, though this sometimes occurs in diseases when so far
advanced as to take away all hope of the patient’s recovery, the general
laws of nature unfortunately (so it seems to our limited understand-
ing) do not operate in this discriminating manner. Men must there-
fore, in unavoidable suffering, try and content themselves with what
comfort philosophy (not forgetting its religious phase) is able to afford
them, and though this may fall far short of what they had hoped to
obtain before they were driven to take refuge in it, they will still find
that, under most circumstances, fortitude and resignation, cultivated by
a firm will, can do much towards alleviating their sorrows and
misfortunes.—Nov., 1871.
THE EEIDIM OF THE BIBLE IE PUBLIC
SCHOOLS.
'T'HE question whether the Bible should bo read in our public schools
seems to resolve itself into this —Is it just and right that money
should bo forcibly taken from men who do not believe in the religious
doctrines deduced from the Scriptures, and applied in the dissemina-
tion of those doctrines ? It was well said by a speaker in a debate by
the Society on this question some months ago, that if the minority were
not sometimes forced to yield to the opinions of the majority it would
bo useless to make laws at all. No doubt the principle of religious
toleration, like every other principle, has its limits ; but how are they
to be defined ? Perhaps wo may arrive at some answer to this question
on examining the reasons on which the principle of religious toleration
rests, and then it may be seen that in cases where they do not apply
the principle itself falls to the ground.
To me it seems simply an application to religion of the well-known
legal maxim—“ Sic utere tuo ut alienum non Icedas ” —A man’s opinions
are part of his possessions, which he has a right to use as he likes, so
long as he does not in so doing injure others. Particularly is his
religion— when confined to himself and not affecting his fellow men—
his own, to change or to hold fast according to his convictions. It is a
matter purely between himself and his Maker, to whom alone he is
responsible. “ Who art thou that judgest another man’s servant ?


To his own master he standeth or falleth,” says the Apostle of the
Gentiles. Any forcible interference with a man’s religion may well
excite his indignation. But if his religious opinions lead him to trans-
gress certain broad and well-defined moral principles, which are
essential to the preservation of the community, then his right to
toleration ceases, and it becomes the duty of the State to control his
dangerous liberty, and prevent him from injuring his fellows. Here
we find the limits to the principles of religious toleration. As long as
a man enjoys his religion as a privilege personal to himself, and does
not allow it to affect his dealings with others, so as to lead him to
transgress lhat morality which it is the duty of the Government to
enforce, so long is he entitled to religious freedom in its highest sense ;
but when his religion leads him to perpetrate crime, or disseminate
principles prejudicial to public morality, he lays himself open to legis-
lative interference. However much we may pity the fanaticism of
the Thug or the Mormon, we cannot tolerate it. This brings us
to another great principle, viz.—that there are certain teachings of
morality which it is the duty of the State to inculcate, and that it has
a right in the performance of this duty to appropriate the public funds
even though in so doing it takes money from the minority who dissent
from such doctrines. I think most of my readers will admit that the
majority have a right to make laws for the punishment of offenders
against person and property, and to overrule those who would live
without law other than
** Tlie good old plan,
That they should take who have the power.
And they should keep who can.'*
This right of the State, governing by majority, is, of course, the
very foundation of the existence of communities ; the foundation of
all social and commercial prosperity. Admitting that the State has a
right to punish murder, theft, and other crimes, wo are led to the
conclusion that it not only may, but should endeavor as far as possible
to instil into the rising generation those precepts which will lead each
individual to respect the rights of others. It is evident that if the
majority have a right to use the public funds for the purpose of pre •
venting crime by organizations for punishing offenders, they have an
equal right to use them for the same purpose of prevention by the
different and superior agency of public schools, in which, while secular
education is imparted, the moral principles which are the very basis
of healthy civilisation are carefully inculcated. I think few will
question this right; but now comes the necessary limitation to the
educational duties of the State and the rights correlative thereto.
When these come into collision with the principle of religious tolera-
tion, the latter must to a certain extent give way, but to a certain
extent only. If a man’s religion is such as to lead him to deny those
broad principles of morality on which society rests, he has, it is true,
a right to have such a religion ; but there his right ends. He must not
be allowed to embody it in action, because he would then inevitably
injure others. Suppose, for instance, his religion leads him to the
conviction that men should possess all things in common. He has a
right to believe this; but if he tries to act accordingly, and
appropriates the goods of others, the State may prevent him.


He perhaps even has a right to a certain extent to proclaim
and disseminate his opinions, hut even here the Government has
a right to interfere if his proselytising seems likely to create serious
dangers to the community. This man, moreover, has no right to
object that public money, to which he is obliged to contribute, is
appropriated in propagating that with which he does not agree, if such
teaching is essential to the well-being of the community, because, as I
have endeavored to show, the State is justified in taking this course,
and the man’s religion is not one in respect of which he is entitled to
claim perfect toleration.
Let us now apply these principles to the reading of the Bible in
public schools. Of course, it is well known that a minority exists in
the community who do not wish funds to which they contribute to be
applied in teaching the Christian religion. This minority consists of
Jews, Deists, and others. Now these men are perfectly right in their
objection if those principles which I maintain the State has a right to
teach by means of public schools, can be taught independently of the
Bible; for it is clearly an infringement of the principle of religious tolera-
tion to force men to support a religion with which they cannot agree,
unless such a course can be justified as being essential to the moral
health of the rising generation. We therefore come to this question as
the only legitimate issue between the advocates for Bible-readingin our
public schools and their opponents :—Can that morality which is
essential to the wellbeing of the State be taught without using the
Bible as an authority ? I think this question must be answered in
the affirmative. “ Thou shalt do no murder,” “ Thou shalt not steal,”
were commands given in thunder from Mount Sinai; but the same
principles were recognised by other nations of the earth long before
the advance of Christianity made known to them the Mosaic code.
Even the golden ride, “ All things whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you, do ye even so to them ” was taught by Isocrates in
almost identical words hundreds of years before the Christian era.
Whatever assistance morals may derive from the Bible, they are in-
trinsically independent of it. Our moral perceptions are a revelation
to us from the Most High—our primary and most valuable revelation.
So far from morality resting on the authority of the Bible, the Bible
itself appeals to our moral feelings in support of its claim to bo a true
revelation. “ Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether
they are of God,” says St. John. Try the spirits! Yes, but by what
testP By their conformity to what wo feel to bo the highest and
holiest principles implanted by God in the human breast. It cannot
be too distinctly borne in mind that the Bible must derive its sanction
from morality. What does the right of private judgment mean if not
the right of each man by the light which bums in his own bosom to
examine the Scriptures and reject all that does not seem to him to
bear the marks of divine origin P This glorious privilege the first
Protestant reformers nobly vindicated, and every Protestant, in words
at least, now admits its validity. If we would know whether any
moral precept is divine, wo must ask ourselves—Does it seem good P
Is it in accordance with the dictates of morality? If not, it cannot
be divine. If then, as it seems to me, at least the broad fundamental


principles of morality, which are the basis of social life, exist by their
own inherent strength independently of the Bible, they can be incul-
cated without any reference to it. The State can thus fulfil its duties
without in the slightest degree violating the true principles of religious
toleration.
One word to those who cannot be satisfied unless the State employs
its machinery in propagating the religion of Christ. “My kingdom,”
said the Saviour, “is not of this world.” From what cause have all
religious wars, burnings, torturings, and all the innumerable perse-
cutions that have been perpetrated in the name of Jesus arisen, if not
from the fatal neglect or ignorance of the one great principle that
religion, so far as it concerns the next world, rests purely between
each man and his Creator; and that it is only when it affects the
temporal well-being of his fellows that these have a right to interfere P
There are so many elements of uncertainty in religious opinions, that
no man, let his convictions be ever so strong, should expect, much less
require, others to accept them. The propagation of Christianity by
fire and sword has happily, for a time at least, come to a pause. But
the spirit of the old persecutors still survives in many who perhaps
least suspect it. Unless the advocates for Bible-reading in schools
supported by funds drawn from the purses of Christian, Jew, and
Deist alike can show that the temporal well-being of the community
imperatively demands the propagation of Biblical teaching, they have
only one argument to fall back upon, namely—that all who have not
been taught to believe in Jesus are doomed to eternal misery hereafter,
and therefore they must spread their belief at any cost.
If a Deist were to ask by what right a religion in which he did not
believe was supported by funds forcibly taken from him in the shape of
taxes and other contributions to the revenue, what would be the reply ?
It might be, “We takeyour money to assist in paying for the teaching
of a religion essential to public morality, as the latter rests ou the
Bible, and cannot be taught without referring to its authority.” Let
this be proved, and the propriety not only of the reading of the Bible
in public schools, but of a State-supported religion, is at once estab-
lished in conformity with the principles above stated. Or the reply
might bo, “Although your children may be taught morality without
the aid of Christianity, yet their welfare in the next world will bo im-
perilled if we neglect the opportunity which Government schools afford
of indoctrinating them with a religion requisite to their future sal-
vation. The trifling injustice you complain of is not worth mentioning.
What are a few pounds taken from an unbeliever compared to the
salvation of a single soul ? ” Exactly so. “And what is a few hours’
writhing at the stake compared to the never-ending torments of hell,
from which we are saving men by rooting out this heresy ? ” said
religious persecutors in times past. This is a question of principle.
If the magnitude of the result obtained will sanction a trifling injustice
to an unbeliever, it is sufficient excuse for endeavoring to keep men
in one faith at any cost, whether of money or blood. If men’s interests
in this world only are taken into consideration by the State, its duties
are to a great extent plain and well-defined. But when religious
doctrines relating to a future, world are imported into questions of


Government, the door is opened to endless theological controversy. A
recent writer, speaking of the auto dafe, says : —“ If you could he sure
that it was not the prophet but the pernicious sophist that burned in the
fire, and if by reducing his too busy brain to safe and orthodox ashes
you could destroy his sophistries and create in other minds a whole-
some fear of sophistry, without creating at the same time an unwhole-
some dread of intellectual activity and freedom, then Christian
humanity might look with some satisfaction even on. an auto da fe." *
But we cannot be sure. The advance of thought has necessarily
weakened dogmatic teaching, Eeligious doctrines cannot be mathe-
matically demonstrated, and no man who is not blind and deaf and
void of reason can look on the multiplicity of sects around him, many
of which number among their adherents persons eminent for piety and
intellect, without feeling that, whilst such differences in religious
opinion exist among the wisest and best of mankind, it would be in
the highest degree arrogant and unjustifiable for him to expect his
own particular views, or the particular views of his denomination, to
be adopted by every one else. Surely, then, it is impossible that in
these days of toleration and respect for the opinions of others, our
Government, acting according to the voice of a majority in the
country, can deliberately proceed upon principles which, carried to
their logical conclusion, would “ rekindle the flames of Smithfield ”
and revive the horrors of the Spanish Inquisition.
The arguments I have above advanced may be thus summarized:—
The State has no right to interfere with any man’s religion unless such
interference is necessary for the temporal well-being ofthe community.
Forcing a man to contribute money towards the circulation of religious
doctrines with which he does not agree is an interference with his
religion. Bible-reading in public schools cannot take place without
the enforced monetary assistance of men who dissent from the religious
doctrines of the Bible. Bible-reading in public schools is not necessary
for the temporal well-being of the community, and therefore the State
has no right to authorise it.—Nov., 1872.
LAW AHD JUSTICE.
AEE law and justice identical ? If not, why ? The answer to
both these questions is very simple. No one would hesitate to
give a negative reply to the first, but it is surprising how many peojfie
are unable to answer the second. They are ready to blame the Legis-
lature, the drafters of statutes, and, strange to say, most of all, the
lawyers, never thinking that the principal and irremovable cause of
the evil they deprecate lies in the very nature of law. I think that
• Ecce Homo.


each of the principal complaints made against our laws will be found
to range itself under one of the following heads :
1. The difficulty of ascertaining the law on any particular point,
giving rise to uncertainty and increased litigation and expense.
2. The existence of what are termed “ hard cases,” where a strict
and rigorous application of law is productive of great injustice.
3. The expense of going to law, which sometimes amounts to a
denial of justice.
If we enquire into the cause of these grievances, we shall, I think
find that they arise from principles which must always continue in
operation ; and that although wise law reform may indefinitely lessen
them, they will always exist in a complex state of society.
One of the most thoughtless yet frequent remarks made by men
whose motive is no doubt laudable but whose sense must be questioned
is, “We don’t want law, we want justice and a favourite method
suggested for attaining this desirable object is, that the Judges should
not decide according to strict law. but, in the remarkable words of a
South Australian statute, “ according to equity and good conscience,
and the substantial merits of the case.” Now it is just the utter
impossibility of such a method of jurisprudence being available in the
present state of our civilization that in groat part causes the three
evils here enumerated. There are various reasons why a Judge should
not adjudicate after such a primitive fashion. In spite of the extra-
ordinary enactment above quoted, I think few even among the shining
lights of our colonial Legislature would have the power of the Judge
unfettered by any laws whatever, leaving him to exercise the most
arbitrary and irresponsible discretion. But for the sake of argument
suppose for one moment that our Judges had such power. Laws
not being necessary in this reign of “ equity and good conscience,” of
course the Judges would no longer be selected from the legal profession.
Each Judge would have his own private opinion as to justice and
equity. The never-ending disputes of the casuists would bo carried
on in the new Courts of Conscience. One Judge would think it only
right that that when a man had made a promise he should carry it
out, and effect would therefore be given to hasty and thoughtless
statements of intention, the old technical doctrine of “ consideration”
being wholly disregarded.* Another would perhaps think that the
duties of gratitude to benefactors should not be allowed to be broken,
and would nonsuit a plaintiff who basely sued for a paltry grocery
account a man who had once preserved his life. Possible causes of
action and possible defences would be infinitely multiplied, and
certainty of right would be altogether unknown. So far I have
assumed that the Judges would bo the most upright of men, but we
know that this could not always bo the case. Exercising an irrespon-
sible discretion, untrammelled by laws or precedents, they would have
every opportunity of practising favouritism and injustice. Tempta-
tion would not be wanting, and bribery and corruption would soon
♦ A claim on a promise (I think to contribute to some charity), in which there was
not the slightest “ consideration/’ was actually enforced by the judgment of a country
Local Court a few years ago. The amount claimed being only £5 the defendant had no
right of appeal to the Supreme Court.


undermine'.the foundations of society. I think even our Parliament
would hesitate before it granted such absolute discretion to Judges.
But if such a primitive jurisprudence would not suit our age, is it
not possible to frame a few broad, general rules, easily learned,
certain, and meeting every case ? Emphatically, no. Laws must
either leave a wide discretion to the Judge, or they must as far as
possible meet every case. Take the first alternative. The evils
attending an absolute discretion in the Judge would operate to a less
but still most disastrous extent. Men would never know the nature
of their rights or the effect of their agreements. Every step would be
attended with doubt, great in proportion to the width of the discretion
given to the Judges. When the Chancellors of England began the
exercise of that jurisdiction which has since gradually developed into
our present system of equity, they acted upon their own ideas of
justice, without regarding principles or precedents. Their assumption
of judicial authority, though in part caused by their own ambition,
was called for by the necessities of the time. Ihe common law of
England, built up by gradually formed customs and by judicial
decisions, and modified by statutes, had become unsuitable in many
respects to the wants of the age. It was now that the Chancellors
stepped in and gave relief for many hard and unjust doctrines of the
law. Their interference was productive of very beneficial results, and
would never had been needed if the Legislature had effected the
improvements required, and the Judges of the Common Law Courts
had not been so narrow-minded in their administration of the law.
The Chancellors had nothing like an absolute judicial authority over
all matters ; they assumed authority only in particular cases, and
would not have been allowed to interfere in every matter which might
have been brought before them, the evils attending their uncertain
method of adjudication being too clearly perceived to allow any great
extension of their authority as long as they continued to decide in an
arbitrary manner.
But though the early Courts of Equity were thus limited in the
subjects of their jurisdiction, there was still ground for the complaint
of uncertainty. The learned Selden thus writes:—“ For law we have
a measure, and know what to trust to ; equity is according to the con-
science of him that is Chancellor; and as that is larger or narrower, so
is equity. It is all one as if they should make the standard for the
measure a Chancellor’s foot. What an uncertain measure this would
be ! One Chancellor has a long foot, another a short foot, a third an
indifferent foot. It is the same thing with the Chancellor’s con-
science.” , But since the close of the seventeenth century the relief
administered by Courts of Equity has been elaborated into a fixed and
uniform system, in the exercise of which the Judges are governed by
rules and precedents in the same manner as Courts of Common Law.
In the first part of this article I endeavoured to show that it would
be very dangerous to the rights and liberties of men to leave any wide
discretion to Judges. If this is so, it follows that the second alter-
native before mentioned must be adopted, i.e., the laws must as far
as possible be made to meet every case. But a few broad general
rules are totally inadequate to meet the infinite variety of cases


constantly arising amidst tlio complex relations of our daily social and
commercial life. If laws are to be strict, they must also be multiform.
The more general a rule, the more likely it is, when strictly applied to
every case, to work great injustice. Here, then, we find the source of
the principal evils attending our system of law. “ Its complexity and
bulk,” says Judge Byles, “ constitute the price that must be paid for
the reign of certainty, order, and uniformity.” We must to some
extent incur uncertainty by the effort to attain certainty. “An
immense load of laws, heaped one above another,” is gradually
formed by a long succession of precedents and statutes, and the
hapless and bewildered layman, “ finding no end, in Pandering mazes
lost,” has to consult his lawyer at every turn, while the latter himself
is often unable to give any certain or reliable opinion. Hence the
first evil alluded to, namely, the difficulty of ascertaining the law on
any particular point. The second evil, the existence of “hard cases,”
arises from the impossibility of providing for every possible combi-
nation of circumstances, even in the most elaborate and complex juris-
prudence. Injustice must occasionally bo done that justice may
prevail. Perfection is impossible. The highest object of a jurist
should therefore be to frame such rules as will work most justice in
the long run. After all, the Judges must have some discretion, and
the difficulty is to make laws which do not leave too much power to
the judicial officer and at the same time are not too unbending and
rigorous. Yet unbending to some extent they must be, or certainty is
lost; and hence palpable injustice occurs in isolated cases. Many
rules of law which are often condemned for their harsh technical
operation will be found to prevent much more evil than they cause.
The law which gives an infant under the age of twenty-one years the
privilege of avoiding his agreements, and that which requires certain
agreements to be evidenced by writing, are rules which often work
injustice ; yet they are good laws, for they prevent evils much greater
than they cause. The third evil, that of expense, also evidently
arises from the complexity of our laws. It is only partially obviated
by the practice of making the unsuccessful party to an action pay the
costs of the other side. Of course Ido not for one moment intend to
argue that our laws are as near perfection as they can possibly be
brought, and that amendment is unnecessary. When a law, either
through having been unwise from the beginning, or through having
become unsuited to the conditions of the age, is seen to fail in its
operation and to produce as much evil as good, or when it can be
amended so as to produce more good and less evil, no doubt it should
be altered. Besides, the laws require digesting and codifying from
time to time.
Law reform is a great and imperative necessity of the present age.
But it should not be undertaken rashly, or we shall be plunged into
evils tenfold greater than any which now exist. Lawyers, as a class,
are said to be conservative. “ Via trita, via tuta," is one of their
favourite maxims, and it might well be borne in mind by our Parlia-
ment. Though many old rules which suited old times do not suit the
present, the Legislature ought to be very careful how it proceeds in
the work of amendment. “It hath been an ancient observation in


the laws of England that whenever a standing rule of law, of which
the reason perhaps could not be remembered or discerned, hath been
wantonly broken in upon by statutes or new resolutions, the wisdom
of the rule hath in the end appeared from the inconveniences that have
followed from the innovation.”f Fresh statutes are always attended
with considerable doubt until their construction has been judicially
ascertained, and if, as is so frequently the case in this colony, they are
carelessly drafted and contain provisions altogether unintelligible, the
evil is tenfold increased. When a reform introducing new principles,
or materially altering the law, is contemplated in England, a Com-
mission is appointed, consisting sometimes partly of men of business
and partly of lawyers, and sometimes altogether of lawyers, who
ascertain the existing law on the subject of intended legislation, and
enquire into the necessity of reform and the best mode of amendment.
By this means the inconveniences necessarily attending fresh legisla-
tion are greatly lessened. At the present time a most extensive law
reform is contemplated in England, comprising an entire change in
the system of judicature, and perhaps a fusion of the two systems of
law and equity. But the difficulties attending this movement are
thoroughly recognised, and the desired change will not be effected
without great circumspection and care.
But in this colony the course of law reform is often very different.
A grievance is perceived, and an Act is botched together and hurried
through Parliament with hardly any consideration, containing perhaps
provisions which indefinitely modify the old rules of law. The
results are confusion, uncertainty, and expensive litigation. Even our
vaunted Beal Property Act, which Sir it. Torrens has been vainly
attempting to force in all its crudity down the reluctant throats of
English politicians, has been found to be a mass of incongruities,
non bene junctarum discordia semina rerum, and baffles lawyer and
Judge in the attempt to put a consistent construction upon its clauses.
Then there is that “ equity and good conscience ” clause in the Local
Court Act—a most absurd enactment, foisted in by some zealous
member, who thought to get rid of all the old technicalities of the
law by this masterpiece of legislation. This clause has been decided
by the Supreme Court to be utterly inoperative. It either means that
when no principle of law prevents it, the Magistrates are to decide
cases upon their merits ; or that laws are to be altogether disregarded,
and the particular views of justice held by the Magistrate who
happens to try the case are to prevail. If the former is the true
construction, the clause adds nothing to the old law ; as Judges, in
the absence of precedents and rules, always did decide “according to
the natural reason of the thing.” j If the latter meaning is the
correct one, the clause is happily void, as being repugnant to the other
provisions of the Act and wholly absurd, though worthy Magistrates
do sometimes use it as an excuse for their arbitrary decisions.§
t Blackstone’s Commentaries.
X Stephen's Commentaries, vol. 1, p. 50.
§ An amusing instance of the ideas of administering justice sometimes entertained
by the “ great unpaid” occurred in England five or six months ago at the quarter
sessions for Essex. A motion had just been made by one of the Magistrates, ** That


It is gratifying to observe that Parliament has at length seen the
necessity of a careful revision of the Real Property Act, and that a
Commission has been appointed to enquire into its provisions and
recommend measures for removing its uncertainty and inconveniences.
It is to bo hoped that the defects every day coming to light in this
Act will teach legislators a lesson of caution, and that for the future
a little more care will be exercised by those to whom is entrusted the
important duty of law reform. —May, 1873.
'T'HIS work, lately reprinted in Melbourne, is as its title imports, the
1 autobiography of a dog. But though it abounds with inter-
esting traits of canine nature, and contains one or two quaint doggish
traditions, its chief interest centres in the delineation of modem
society. Puck, being “ only a dog,” is of course immeasurably
superior to the weaknesses of poor humanity, and from his exalted
pedestal he is able to declaim with edifying severity against the vices
and follies of men. It is true that on one occasion, having got into
fashionable company, ho coolly cuts an old acquaintance who has
previously done him a good turn ; but then he is stung with remorse
the next minute, and avers that his race is scarcely ever tainted by
such weakness, and always feels acute remorse when it descends to
man’s level by wounding a friend or fawning on a foe.
“ Puck ”is certainly a work of remarkable power. It contains
scathing satire, withering invective, witty conversation, and exquisite
loving descriptions of country life and scenery ; the life in the still,
cool, shady Derbyshire woods with which the tale opens contrasting
picturesquely with the sunny, odorous, drowsy, idyllic existence of a
French summer in the country subsequently depicted. The author’s
graphic power is marvellous, though her style is so full that it
occasionally becomes almost turgid. Her tragic genius is such that
the last edition of Bum’s " Justice of the Peace ” (the standard work on the duties of
Magistrates) be supplied to each petty sessional division of the county,” when a Mr.
Johnston rose and said, ** I am entirely opposed to this outrageous proposition, and I
think after the late decision of the Court it will not be seriously pressed. (Laughter.)
What is the good of ’ these musty law books P Let us decide the cases that come
before us by the law of nature—(loud laughter)—and not give any attention to what
quaint and stupid old people have written down in a long work, which is to cost six
guineas a volume.” (Renewed laughter.) The Law Times remarks on this How the
learned editors of the last valuable edition of Bum will like to be called ‘ quaint and
stupid old people * we do not stop to enquire; but if Mr. Johnston is in the habit of
deciding cases according to the law of natute, it occurs to us to suggest whether the
Lord Chancellor might not deem it advisable to relieve him of the responsible duty of
administering laws which in many respects are exceedingly artificial.”
*** Puck; his Vicissitudes, Observations, Conclusions, Friendships, and Philoso-
phies. Related by Himself, and edited by Ouida.” Australian Edition. Melbourne:
George Robertson. Adelaide jE, S. Wigg & Son,


one requires sometimes to stop and reflect that the events she narrates
are only imaginary, in order not to be too deeply moved by her
sorrowful pathos. We give the following as an example of her word
painting, premising that the full force of her writing cannot be
appreciated in extracts, but is only fully felt while breathing the
atmosphere created by the work as a whole. It is a description of
the picture which first brought the young painter, Carlos Merle, into
fame, and afterwards led to his destruction in the very manner
shadowed forth in its prophetic delineation:—
“ This picture of Carlos’ was gorgeous in hue, shadowy fax meaning,
had but little detail, and was of a terrible force and a passionate
poetry. And yet the subject was very simple. It was only a man
lying dead in a hot glow of sunset, with a wondrous fair face, and a
fearful woe set upon it; self-slain it was easy to tell; and away from
him, looking back over her shoulder, was stealing through the hush
and the heat, with the light of the west all about her like a fire, a
woman, with a wicked laugh upon her mouth, and her bosom all bare,
and her hand gathering up rich disordered gold embroidered robes.
This strange work, which had no story, was called simply ‘ Faustine,’
and it spoke for itself.”
Here is another extract taken from the account of Puck’s Sunday
wanderings with Ben Dare in the depths of the Derbyshire woods :
“ There was one spot I specially loved; it was a dell formed by
huge boulders of granite and gritstone fallen one on another; grown
all over by ferns and by moss, and by all manner of foliage; and
always full of shade even in the hottest noontide.
“♦There Ben would lie for hours, looking up at the blue dreamful
sky, or at the birds moving in the thick leafage.
“ ‘ And to think,’ he murmured once, ‘as the same hand as
shattered down tha mighty stones here, till they lays crushed and
o’ergrowed wi’ the grasses, yit fashioned them wee blue wing feathers
of tha atomy of a tomtit i’ his nest theer. It is wonderfu’! Shanna
we niver know how’t was done ? never see the sun a bit nearer ?
Lord’s sake 1 I canna but wish that He’d a thoct of some ither way
o’ food for keepin’ the varsal world fu’ o’ his critturs, than tha way o’
’em murderin’ one anither, preying on one anither, from tha man on
tha ox tew tha sparrow on tha worm. It don’t seem right like; as
how Him who’d tha power o’ makin’ that sun move i’ tha heavens,
shouldna’ ha bin able to hit a’ some better means for keepin’ tha life
He give i’ us wi’out pittin’ tha lusts in our souls to kill tha weakest
things aside o’ us. It’s uncommon queer —an’ sad tew, as ta seem—
that tha should na be ony way o’ livin’ save by dith.’
“ And so the dim, wise, tender, untutored mind perplexed itself in
sorrowful pondering, and Ben, who could scarce tell one letter from
another, puzzled over problems that the sages and the scholars of the
world cannot solve.”
The last selection we shall make is from an account of a triumph
achieved on a London stage by Gladys Gerant, whom we may call the
heroine of the story: —
“ Breathed through her, shadowed forth by her, having in her all
its vital yet spiritualised being, the vague dreams of the poet took


life and became great. Interpreted by her voice, her eyes, her
eloquence, her gestures, the shadowy fancy of the writer became a
living creature, pure as the dew, generous as the sun, innocent as the
blossom, grand as the tempest.
“ And the listless, ironical, surfeited, debased mental temper of the
world of this your day was enthralled and subdued by an incarnation
so unlike to itself, so far removed from its own narrowed passions and
its own venal materialism; and yet which had reality within it,
because it had the greatness, the truth, and the divine fire which can
be evoked from your human nature in its highest forms and in its
noblest moments —which, indeed, are rare, and found only in your
impulses of heroism, in your hours of self sacrifice, but yet, though
thus rare, still are existent.
“ What is beyond all humanity ever fails to move it; it is the
reason why all the religions of your earth are things of the lip, which
scarcely influence life; it is what remains human, yet is human only
in the highest sense, and by the deepest woe, that can sway your
hearts as the winds the reeds.
“ It is scarce too much to say that such a creation was this which
the mind of the poet had conceived, and which the living power of
the actress placed visibly before the dimmer eyes and the grosser
intelligence of those who, without her, would have missed its meaning.
“There were cold cynics there whose eyes were dim with tears ;
there were frivolous women there whose tongues were bushed and
whose fans were still; there was a fashionable throng there that was
forced to feel, that was compelled to honour, that forgot to be inane,
and did not dare to cavil or to sneer.
“ Do you imagine that a corrupt age cannot revere, that an artificial
age cannot be stirred by truth, that an abject age cannot rise to com-
prehension under the compelling force of genius P—you are wrong to
doubt. Was it not the vilest of the pagan ages that gave credence
and foothold, and tenure, to the faiths and the philosophies of Paul ?
“ .Even as men are to the kine of the fields, so is genius to men ;
when its eyes are on them they dare not refuse to obey, even if they
obey in fear and in hatred. Stone it in the dark they will, indeed—
because men are oftentimes lower than the beasts of stall and sty.
“ When the end had come, and the pent-up emotions of the spec-
tators had found their vent in tumults of applause, in thunders of
homage, the triumph that she had won was no ephemeral glorification
of a fair woman, but was the involuntary witness borije by a
multitude to a power that had vanquished it."
On the whole we can cordially recommend the perusal of this
remarkable book, which bears on every page the stamp of its author’s
fenius. “ Ouida ” delights in depicting tender traits, unlooked for
indnesses, amongst those from whom we should hardly have expected
them. Little Nellie, the ballet-girl, who dances, and postures, and
sings slang songs, and eventually loses her life through sitting up
day after day by the sick-bed of a little companion ill with fever,
though following her calling at night as usual, painfully attracts our
sympathies in spite of her low pursuits and vulgar manners.
cl


We have not space to enter into as detailed a criticism of the merits
and demerits of this work as we could wish, but there is one point
that we may be excused for dwelling on at some length. It has noen
objected to “ Ouida’s ” novels in general, and to this one in particular,
that they are immoral in their tendency. We have not read any of
her other books, and so cannot speak concerning them, but we confess
we are utterly unable to comprehend the standpoint of those who
deem “ Puck ’’ an immoral book. True, it tells the tale of a wicked
woman, one who is portrayed in such dark colors as to make us blush
for the humanity that owns her. True, it holds up the mirror with
unflinching firmness to the corrupt and heartless society of the day,,
but it does this with no sympathetic feeling, but, on the contrary
with scornful invective and unmerciful satire. We are at a loss to
understand why this book that exposes and denounces immorality
should be termed immoral. The fact is that the moral tone of the
author, in spite of an occasional and superficial cynicism, generally
put, by the way, in the mouth of an appropriate character, is
singularly high. Her ideal women, Madelon Bris and Gladys Gerant,
are endowed with all that renders the female character lofty, pure,
and beautiful, while the feminine wickedness which she has chosen to
describe is denounced with a passionate vehemence sometimes too
unmerciful. Whence, then, this charge of immorality ?
It may be founded upon this, that the good men and women,
Reuben Dare, Ambrose the Smith, Madelon Bris, Gladys Gerant, and
others, instead of receiving the reward of their virtue, are doomed to
an unhappy death or a life of pain and regret, while the one
thoroughly bad, cruel, heartless woman marries a marquis, and is left
by the novelist in the full enjoyment of wealth, of all the luxuries
that follow in its train, and of as much pleasure as her sensual,
brutal nature is capable of receiving. Because, forsooth, “ Ouida "
will not endorse the gilded lie that to be good is to ensure happiness
in this world, and that the bad are necessarily wretched, she is called
immoral and her writings condemned! To our thinking, her work as
it stands is not only more artistic but conveys an infinitely deeper and
truer moral than if she had composed “ an edifying didactic tale,”
and duly conducted her bad characters to a miserable end, and her
good ones to marriage and happiness. No doubt if the fate of the
good characters in “ Puck ” were shown in that book to be the
invariable result of virtue the artist would not only have been false
to nature and to truth, but might perhaps have done wrong in throw-
ing such a fearful stumbling block in the way of weak and erring
humanity. But as the misery or untimely deaths of the men and
women we have named were all caused by special circumstances and
by the wickedness and malice of one woman, we fail to sec the
“ immorality ”of the lesson. In all this, even in the doubt which
accompanies the author’s hope of a compensating hereafter, the lesson
wc read is that it is infinitely nobler, grander, and better to live
virtuously with no recompense but suffering than to purchase wealth
and pleasure by vice and sensuality.
Avice Dare is revolting and despicable to the last. No subtle
glamour is cast by the genius of “ Ouida ’’ around her hateful person;


and though, as we have said, she is left in the full enjoyment of
pleasure, we feel that she is no more to be envied by us than the fierce
tigress revelling in the blood of the stricken deer. The moral drawn
by the little terrier Fanfreluohe, pseudo-philosopher that she is, from
the memoirs of her friend Puck is, “ That there is nothing on earth
satisfactory except — a good dinner.” The moral that cannot but be
drawn by the intelligent and conscientious reader is, that we must be
virtuous, not because we shall be rewarded therefor —else surely virtue
were an empty name —but because it is good, and noble, and right,
and therefore, in itself and by itself, more to be chosen than gold, and
silver, and all the precious things of the earth.
We must express our firm conviction that none but a low and
debased nature could possibly receive harm from the perusal of this
book, none indeed but such a nature as would go wrong from its own
uninfluenced vicious tendencies.
To the feebly striving, to the weakly virtuous, as well as to stronger
and more perfect moral natures, this touching and melancholy picture
of life, with its deep and tender love of nature, its true pathos and
lofty ideals, can but be an additional incentive to walk bravely and
well according to their lights, and leave the final result to the
gracious care of Him in whose hands are the issues of life. —Nov.,
1873.
THE EDUCATION BILL.
'T'HE Legislative Council do not quite deserve the obloquy which
has been so liberally heaped upon them for rejecting the
Education Bill last session. The Register commented very severely
upon the action of the Council, and perhaps its most telling reproof
was conveyed in some clever verses which appeared in one of Crab-
thorn’s weekly letters. From Melbourne also come some notes of
reprobation. Our sister colony is still under the influence of that
gushing enthusiasm from the flood of which her own educational
measure sprang, Venus-like, challenging the admiration of the world.
That South Australia, or any part of her Legislature, should dare to
imagine that anything the sapient Victorians had adopted might yet
not be the most perfect or desirable policy, was quite enough to draw
down the censure of that enlightened people.
But perhaps the most undeserved sneer at the Council was contained
in the following passage in a letter signed “ Beta,” which appeared in
the last issue of this Magazine. He says, “ These worthy members


of our Upper House, these successful merchants and squatters, these
rich land-jobbers, who have long fattened on the hard-working,
struggling farmer, and ever been ready to wring the last penny out
of him, never made their money by carrying out this principle, and do
not feel inclined to agree with it now.”
We confess we do not see anything in the arguments employed by
the opponents of the Education Bill in the Legislative Council to
justify these coarse insinuations. Whatever irritation the advocates
of free and compulsory education may feel at the rejection of their
pet scheme, they are not justified in imputing base motives, or in
attacking the private character of those who differ from them. It is
a pity that so much of that rancorous spirit of controversy which has
hitherto been considered the peculiar attribute of religious disputes
should have been imported into the question of education.
And after all, was the Council not justified in its action? Con-
stitutionally it occupies an important position, and its duty is to act
as a kind of fly-wheel and impart a decent regularity to the motions
of a sometimes too energetic democratic steam-engine. Of course, its
veto should not be arbitrarily and capriciously exercised; but we do
think that when such an important measure as the Education Bill of
last session waspassed through the House of Assembly amidstpowerful
opposition in Parliament and ominous murmurs of dissent from a
strong section of outsiders, when its acceptance by the House was
followed by public meetings in various parts of the colony strongly
condemning its policy, and when a large proportion of the members
of the Upper House personally held views opposed to it, the Legislative
Council, discharging its proper function as a wholesome check upon
the more excitable Lower House, was perfectly justified in saying as
in effect it did—“ Well, this Bill has provoked much opposition both
in and out of Parliament, and we think that for the present it had
better not become law.” It is decidedly creditable that the Council
had the firmness to do this in spite of the mighty voice of the Press,
which so far from representing the omnipotent vox populi, is more
often a species of theatrical “ thunder rumbling from the mustard-
bowl ” wielded by the hands of the particular editor who sits behind
the scenes, to split the ears of the groundlings.
In the debates on the Education Bill in the House of Assembly,
remarks fell from some of the members, notably from Mr. Eowland
Bees, which seemed to indicate their belief that not only should the
Government provide an elementary education for the masses, but that
it should also provide a high-class education. We think these
opinions open to much question. The tendency of the soundest modern
political thought is to restrict as much as possible the functions of
the Legislature. Protective policies have been shown to be almost
uniformly mischievous, and the surest way to aid a nation’s progress
is to leave it alone as much as possible.
In the wonderful fragment left by the late lamented Henry Thomas
Buckle as a monument of his profound genius, one of the author’s
chief ends is to show that to the hampering and weakening influence
of Govermental fostering are due the most serious obstacles hitherto
thrown in the path of human advancement. He ascribes the difference


between the conditions of France and England largely to the paternal
coddling of French Governments as contrasted with the generally
independent, self-reliant genius of the English; and there is great
force in his reasoning. The only justification of a free and compulsory
education law to our mind is that it is a quasi-criminal measure, and
comes within the legislation necessary for the protection of person and
property. It is better to spend money in giving the children of the
poor an elementary education sufficient to enable them to gain an
honest livelihood, and at the same time to instil into their minds the
principles of morality, than to let them grow up in ignorance and vice,
alternately to prey upon and burden the community.
But these reasons for free education d.o not extend to a high class
instruction. There are many objects which imperatively demand that
expenditure which some of our legislators would devote to purposes
of more than doubtful utility. We commend to our readers’ consider-
ation the following extract from a recent publication by Mr. Herbert
Spencer, one of the most eminent of living social philosophers:—
“All further requirements are unimportant compared with this
primary requirement, that each shall so live as neither to burden
others nor to injure others. And all further appliances for influencing
the actions and natures of men are unimportant, compared with those
serving to maintain and increase the conformity to this primary
requirement. But unhappily, legislators and philanthropists, busy
with schemes which, instead of aiding adaptation, indirectly hinder it,
give little attention to the enforcing and improving of those arrange-
ments by which adaptation is effected.
“ And here, on behalf of the few who uphold this policy of natural
discipline, let me emphatically repudiate the name of laissez-faire as
applied to it, and emphatically condemn the counter-policy as involving
a laissez-faire of the most vicious kind. While holding that when the
State leaves each citizen to get what good for himself he can, and to
suffer what evil he brings on himself, such a let-alone policy is
eventually beneficial; I contend that, when the State leaves him to
bear the evils inflicted by other citizens, and can be induced to defend
him only at a ruinous cost, such a let-alone policy is both immediately
and remotely injurious. When a Legislature takes from the worthy
the things they have labored for, that it may give to the unworthy
the things they have not earned—when cause and consequence, joined
in the order of Nature, are thus divorced by statesmen —then may
properly come the suggestion— ‘ Cease your interference.’ But when,
in any way, direct or indirect, the unworthy deprive the worthy of
their dues, or impede them in the quiet pursuit of their ends, then
may properly come the demand —‘ Interfere promptly, and be in fact
the protectors which you are in name.’ Our politicians and philan-
thropists, impatient with a salutary laissez-faire, tolerate and even
defend a laissez-faire that is in the highest degree mischievous.
Without hesitation, this regulative agency we call the Government
takes from us some £IOO,OOO a year to pay for Art-teaching and to
establish Art-museums; while, guarding us against robbers, it makes
convictions difficult by demurring to the cost of necessary evidence —
even the outlay for a plan, admitted by the taxing-master, being


refused by the Treasury! Is not that a disastrous laissez-faire ?
While millions are voted without a murmur for an expedition to
rescue a meddling consul from a half-savage king, our Executive
resists the spending of a few extra thousands to pay more judges;
the result being not simply vast arrears and long delays, but immense
injustices of other kinds—costs being run up in cases which lawyers
know will never be heard, and which, when brought into court, the
over-burdened judges get rid of by appointing junior counsel as
referees, an arrangement under which the suitors have not simply to
pay over again all their agents, at extra rates, but have also to pay
their judges.* Is not that, too, a flagitious laissez-faire ? Though,
in our solicitude for Negroes, we have been spending £50,000 a year
to stop the East African slave trade, and failing to do it, yet only now
are we providing protection for our own sailors against unscrupulous
shipowners—only now have sailors, betrayed into bad ships, got
something more than the option of risking death by drowning or going
to prison for breach of contract! Shall we not call that, also, a
laissez-faire that is almost wicked in its indifference P At the same
time that the imperativeness of teaching all children to write, and to
spell, and to parse, and to know where Timbuctoo lies, is being agreed
to with acclamation, and vast sums raised that these urgent needs
may be met, it is not thought needful that citizens should be enabled
to learn the laws they have to obey; and though these laws are so
many commands, which, on any rational theory, the Government
issuing them ought to enforce, yet in a great mass of cases it does
nothing when told that they have been broken, but leaves the injured
to try and enforce them at their own risk, if they please. Is not that
again a demoralising laissez-faire —an encouragement to wrong-doing
by a half-promise of impunity ? Once more, wnat shall we say of the
laissez-faire which cries out because the civil administration of justice
costs us £BOO,OOO a year —because to protect men’s rights we annuallv
spend half as much again as would build an ironclad I—because to
prevent fraud and enforce contracts we lay out each year nearly as
much as our largest distiller pays in spirit-duty P—what, I ask, shall
we say of the laissez-faire which thus thinks it an extravagance that
one-hundredth part of our national revenue should go in maintaining
the vital condition to well-being P Is not that a laissez-faire which
we might be tempted to call insane, did not most sane people agree in
it ? And thus it is throughout. The policy of quiescence is adopted
where active interference is all-essential; while time, and energy, and
and money, are absorbed in interfering with things that should be left
to themselves. Those who condemn the let-alone policy in respect to
matters which, to say the least, are not of vital importance, advocate
or tolerate the let-alone policy in respect to vitally-important matters.
Contemplated from the biological point of view, their course is doubly
mischievous. They impede adaptation of human nature to the social
state, both by what they do and by what they leave undone.” —
Feb., 1874,
* And even then there are often ruinous delays. A barrister tells me that in a case
in which he was himself the referee they had but six meetings in two years.


DESTRUCTIVE FORCES.
t( all the intellectual weapons ever wielded by man,” says Lord
'-s Macaulay, “ the most terrible was the mockery of Voltaire.”
The brilliant rhetorician goes on to show that, while sometimes used
with mischievous effect, the trenchant sarcasm of Voltaire was
again and again directed with most potent and beneficial energy
against institutions and men hardly assailable by any other means.
Voltaire may indeed stand as an embodiment or representative of
destructive power and of scepticism. Now, destructive force is with-
out doubt a most useful element in the constitution of the world.
The vital power of the human race is conserved and organized by its
constructive element. Institutions arise suited to the needs of the ago
that fashions them. Living truths are discovered and settled by
formula) that more or less adequately express them. But as time rolls
on and mankind progresses in civilization and knowledge, these insti-
tutions and these formulas become unsuited to the wants of men.
Still, the conservative element of human nature, which leads men to
cling to old and settled things, and the vis inertioe of long standing
organizations, often preserves them long after they have become useless
and even mischievous. Now comes the need of destructive power.
These old opinions and time-worn institutions cumber the ground.
Away with them! Now, indeed, the “ sons of thunder” accomplish a
glorious mission, and effectually clear the way for better organizations
and formulae wide enough to contain the increased growth of know-
ledge. True it is—for what good but contains an admixture of evil ?
—that they often destroy things which have not fulfilled their mission,
and therefore must bo formed anew by the creative energy of man-
kind, which is, thank God, able for the task.
It is one of the saddest, yet truest teachings of observation and
experience, that those forces and laws which are most essential to the
general well-being and advancement of the world are also most
disastrous in their occasional consequences to individuals. This holds
true alike in the material and the spiritual sphere. The law of gravi-
tation is the most fundamental and general that has yet been revealed
to us. It is the very nexus and bond of the universe. Distant planets
move in obedience to it. It is essential to the existence of the smallest
animalcules. It is probably the basis, the mother, of heat, light,
electricity, nay, perhaps of life itself. But what calamity it does and
may produce to individuals! It has caused deluges innumerable. It
may yet hurl to destruction the whole of the solar system. The same
truth is palpable with regard to the force of heat, the combative
propensities, and the passion of amativeness.
Acknowledging, as with joy we do, that destructive power and de-
structive criticism, nay, the very Satans and Mephistopholos of the
world, do but fulfil the parts allotted to them by Divine Providence,


one lamentable fact claims our attention. Men of great destructive
powers are often profoundly unconscious that they only fulfil a portion
of the great plan of the universe. Blindly following their instincts,
they cut, fell, hack, and destroy, they analyze and criticize, they wither
with scorn and sarcasm, and do not see that with all their intellect
their position is far inferior to that occupied by the creative geniuses
who in bygone ages created and fashioned the institutions and forms
of thought and belief they now undermine ; do not preceive that these
institutions and forms do contain and embody most important truths
and principles, imperfect, indeed, as truths conceived by finite minds
must ever be, but yet necessary parts, perhaps even foundations and
corner-stones, of the grand edifice of humanity.
The destructive spirit, in its individual manifestations, often shows
itself incapable of appreciating the good qualities of the objects it
attacks. It leads men to take a narrow and one-sided view of others.
Owing to the inherent imperfection of all terrestrial things, the best
men and the best institutions have vulnerable points. On these
destructive criticism fastens, and seeing only these, utterly ignores
everything else. And as the selfish and envious element of man
delights in seeing the shortcomings of others exposed, the destructive
critic never wants an audience. It is such pleasure to a little man to
hear a great man condemned for his foibles or faults. And great men
have often great weaknesses, or make great mistakes or commit great
sins, which it is the easiest thing in the world for others who are not
worthy to unloose their shoelatchets to hold up to scorn and execra-
tion. A man is often harshly judged for faults that only
form a small side of his large and mighty character. A great sinner
may bo far nobler, grander, and better than a man who hardly ever
sinned at all, simply because his poor and pitiful nature had not force
enough. Stocks and stones never sin, but are they therefore better
than a David, a Mirabeau, or a Bums P
Among the many criticisms that have been passed upon the
late John Stuart Mill, it has been said that, though a wonderfully
keen and able analytic thinker, he possessed no profound abstract or
intuitive genius. But whatever may have been Mr. Mill’s deficiencies
in this respect, it is very pleasing to find that, unlike his father,—an
equally keen but much narrower man —he could warmly appreciate
the excellence of differently constituted minds. In his autobiography
he pays a generous tribute to that stem and rugged intuitionalist, that
hater of utilitarianism, Thomas Carlyle. He says, “ I did not, how-
ever, deem myself a competent judge of Carlyle. I felt that he was
a poet and I was not; that he was a man of intuition, which I was not;
and that as such he not only saw many things long before me, which
I could only, when they were pointed out to me, hobble after and
prove; but that it was highly probable he could see many things that
were not visible to me even after they were pointed out. I knew that
I could not see round him, and could never be certain that I saw over
him, and I never presumed to judge him with any definiteness until
he was interpreted to me by one greatly the superior of us both.”
We want more of this warm-hearted sympathy in the world. We
want men to acknowledge the virtues of their opponents. Wo want


men who, however clearly they preceive faults and deficiencies, will
point them out, not as fatal errors, but as things to be amended. We
want, in short, men who, however convinced of the strength of their
own cause and the rectitude of their own intentions, are yet willing
to admit that truth is many-sided, that their own conceptions of the
TJniverse are and must be limited, and that the Finite cannot contain
the Infinite; men who, in spite of darkness and evil and sin, can find
the presence of the Divine in all His works, and can through doubt
and anguish look with fervid though sometimes faltering hope towards
“That God who ever lives and loves.
One God, one law, one element.
And one far off divine event,
To which the whole creation moves.**
—June, 1874.
ROBESPIERRE.
IN these days we are often called upon to revise our estimate of men
whom it has been the fashion to regard as placed by their conduct
beyond the pale of human sympathy. It may happen that the follow-
ing review of the life and times of Robespierre will present the
character of that remarkable man in an aspect new to some of our
readers, one which may suggest some mingling of pity with the
horror which enshrouds his memory.
Francois Maximilien Isidore de Robespierre was born in the year
1759 at Arras, the capital of the Comte d'Artois, in France. His
father was an advocate of that town, and married Marie Josephine
Carreau, the daughter of a brewer. Maximilien was the first child
of this marriage. It is said that the Robespierres had been, from
father to son, notaries at Carvin, near Lille ; that they came over from
Ireland in the sixteenth century, and that in the eighteenth century
one branch of the family settled at Arras, the other remaining at
Carvin.
His early life is buried in obscurity. No anecdotes exist to give us
an insight into his character as a child before he went to Paris, except
one related by his sister Charlotte when refuting with indignation the
statements of certain writers that “ Robespierre’s ferocious disposition
manifested itself in infancy, by his beheading pigeons and sparrows.”
She says that one night having left a pigeon belonging to Maximilien
in the garden, where it perished in a storm, on hearing of the tragic
event, he burst into tears and overwhelmed her with reproaches, and
vowed never again to trust her with any more of his dear pigeons.
When Maximilien was about eleven years old, he had the misfortune
to lose, his mother. Shortly afterwards, his father went away from
Arras, leaving his family there, and set up a school for a little while


at Cologne. He then went to America, and was never more heard of.
Different explanations are given of this strange conduct. Some say
(and among the number, his own daughter Charlotte) that he left
because, being struck with grief at his wife’s death, he was unable to
bear the painful reminiscences which lingered round that old town
where he had spent so many happy hours, esteemed by his neighbours
and beloved in his domestic circle. But some uncharitable individuals
think that it is rather a rare occurrence for a man to leave his native
town, his profession, and his children, and rush about the country in
frantic restlessness because his wife is dead ; and they even insinuate
that financial difficulties were the true cause of M. Eobespierre’s
departure. Be that as it may, it is certain that at an early age
Maximilien foimd himself at the head of his family, consisting of his
two brothers and his sister. Owing to the cares of this position, his
young brow began to wear an aspect of premature sadness, which he
retained ever afterwards during nis strange and eventful career. He
received his early education at the college of Arras under the
patronage of the bishop of that town, who, being pleased with the
great progress made by him in his studies, procured for him a
presentation to the college of Louis le Grand at Paris, and paid for
nis board there, where he was very kindly treated by the principal,
the Abbe Proyart.
On arriving at Paris, Eobespierre began his studies in that spirit of
resolute perseverance by which he was so highly characterized, and,
which, combined with his consistent advocacy of the rights of the
sovereign multitude and the doctrine of the natural equality of man-
kind, was destined to make him the most prominent figure, if not the
most energetic actor, in those stirring times which were now fast ap-
proaching. He particularly devoted himself to the study of the
classics, and so deeply did he sympathize with the glorious deeds of
the grand old patriots of antiquity, that he obtained from his master,
M. Herivaux, the soubriquet of “ The Eoman.” At the same school
were two boys, named Danton and Camille Desmoulins, who sub-
sequently took an active part in the Eevolution. After pursuing his
studies hero with considerable success for about eight years, Maxi-
milien loft the college and began the study of the law under the guid-
ance of M. Fcrrieres, a barrister of some eminence. Ho now became an
ardent admirer of the groat philanthropist Jean Jacques Eousseau,
whoso beautiful compositions and exqisite moral teachings contrast so
strangely with his mean and despicable life. Eobespierre enthusias-
tically embraced the opinions of Eousseau respecting the natural
equality of all men, and particularly respecting the nature of that
social contract which the latter asserted to be the foundation of all
government, and to the principles of which all governments should
conform. So much did ho admire Eousseau, that about this time ho
made a pilgrimage of thirty miles on foot to Ermonville in order to see
him.
After mastering the technicalities of his profession at Paris, Eobes-
pierre returned to his native town, where he set up in business as an
attorney and gained some practice. He lived in a house in the Eue
des Eapporteurs with his younger brother Augustine and his sister


Charlotte. The latter had been educated in a convent under the pro-
tection of the same worthy bishop who had been so kind to Maximilicn.
This prelate and the Abbe de St. Haast possessed nearly one-third of
the city, and the former had preserved the seiguoral right of appoint-
ing judges to the criminal tribunial. Arras was, to use the words of
Michelet, “ a great ecclesiastical, political, and judicial centre, a city
of provincial states and upper tribunals, abounding with business and
lawsuits.”
The first important case Robespierre was called on to defend was in
1783. The recent discoveries of Franklin concerning the nature of
electricity had been adopted in France, and a rich landed proprietor
in Artois, M. de Yissery de Boisvalle, had erected a lightning-con-
ductor on his property. The respectable and orthodox citizens of
Arras were greatly scandalized at this presumptuous act. “What!”
said they, “ shall we rend the lightning from the hand of God P Shall
man presume to intercept the wrath of the Deity P If God wills to
destroy houses or farms, it is his will and pleasure—man’s duty it is
to submit. Those lightning-conductors are but the impious thoughts
of deistical philosophy! Away with them 1” These stupid bigots
fwevailed on the municipal authorities to order the removal of the
ightning-conductor, but M. do Yissery resisted, and, having consulted
Robespierre, the case was taken into the upper council of Arras, a
court of appeal having an extensive jurisdiction. Robespierre took
great pains with the case and managed it so well that he gained con-
siderable eclat, and was complimented by the judges and by his
brethern of the bar. He published an essay on the subject, treating
it both legally and scientifically, and when the final trial came on he
was triumphant.
At this time, Robespierre appeared in a character in which, judging
from some accounts which are commonly received about him, we
should least of all expect him to be found. I mean that of a poet.
There was a poetical society at Arras called “ Les Rosatis,” and it
admitted Maximilicn as one of its members. Though not indeed
gifted with the true poetic fire, he possessed a tolerable facility in
turning rhymes, and a few of his verses, it is said, have really some
merit. Nothing can be more false than the idea that Robespierre was
always a gloomy, relentless fanatic. He was, indeed, always inclined
to melancholy, but he was a Frenchman, and before he entered upon
the path reserved for him as a leader of the Revolution, he possessed
in a considerable degree that expansivenoss of animal spirits which
seems the peculiar characteristic of the inhabitants of the fair and
sunny land of France. In a letter written by him when he was about
twenty-five years of age, he gives a mock heroic description of a journey
of eighteen miles, writes an impassioned eulogy on pastry, and enthu-
siastically commits himself to verse in honour of the unknown in-
ventor of tarts.
In 1783, Robespierre competed for the prize offered by the Royal
Society of Arts and Sciences, at Dijon, for the best essay on the
following subject:—“ What is the origin of that opinion which extends
to all the individuals of a family a part of the shame attached to a
criminal ? That opinion, is it more dangerous than useful ? Should


it be decided in the affirmative, what would be the means of preventing
the danger Eobespierre’s essay, though it did not obtain the prize,
was thought worthy of honourable mention, and obtained a medal of
400 francs. Shortly afterwards, he competed for the eulogy on
Gresset, and gained the second prize. Owing to these essays, Maxi-
milien made a tender impression upon a young lady who vowed to
him that she would never espouse another. Unhappily, on returning
one day from a short journey he found her married. Alas! for the
constancy of woman.
Eobespiorre was now named by the bishop member of the Criminal
Court; but before long, having been obliged in the course of his
duties to sentence a criminal to death, he was so much affected that he
sent in his resignation and gave up an office which had been the early
object of his ambition. His aversion to bloodshed was earnest and
sincere, and no selfish motives were powerful enough to induce him to
take part in the execution even of a criminal. For a long time he con-
sistently opposed capital punishment in the National Assembly, and it
was only when his principles on this subject came into opposition with
the principles of the Eevolution that the former, shattered and broken
in the terrible collision, were abandondod by him as incompatible
with the object to which he had dedicated his life. Thenceforth,
impelled by his strange fanaticism, he became to a great extent blind to
everything except the working out of his single idea —the sovereignty
of the masses. But even then he was as strongly as ever opposed
to bloodshed in any cause save that of liberty.
Though very poor, it is said that Eobespierre would not plead every
kind of cause, but made a selection. On one occasion, some peasants
came to him and entreated him to take up a case for them against his
former protector, the Bishop of Arras. He examined their cause,
found it just, and, considering an advocate to some extent as a magis-
trate, he allowed the eternal principles of equity to triumph over nis
natural feeling of gratitude, and boldly pleaded against his protector,
thus incurring the lasting hatred of the prelate. It is probable that
at that time no other practitioner in Arras would have dared to do this,
as the clergy there held supreme control. In this action we see the
predominance of the abstract idea of justice over all considerations
of gratitude, sentiment, or mercy, by which he was afterwards so
strongly characterized.
A few months before the opening of the States-General (1789)
Eobespierre was appointed President of the Academy of Arras. The
last cause of importance in which he signalled himself was that of a
certain Dupond. This man’s brother, brother-in-law, friends, the
municipal authorities, and, in fact, the whole province, seemed to be
united for the purpose of depriving him of fortune and liberty. He
had returned to his country after an absence of twenty-six years, and
endeavoured to regain possession of his property. His enemies lodged
a lettre de cachet against him, and in undertaking his cause, Eobes-
pierre attacked the whole iniquitous system of lettres de cachet. He
had here indeed a fair mark for his invective, as these instruments of
despotism were among the most atrocious of those monstrous abuses
under which the French people at this time laboured, and which were


so strongly instrumental in stamping upon the French Revolution that
impress of ferocity and revengeful feeling, which was happily not a
feature of the great English rebellion. In this memoir Robespierre,
while attacking with his powerful logic a heinous system of tyranny,
acknowledged in a glowing eulogy the virtues of that monarch whom
he was destined subsequently to lead to the block.
How can we epitomize the causes of the French Revolution P They
extend backwards through the history of France to the foundation of
the throne of Charlemagne. All I can attempt in a short paper like
present, is to enumerate a few of the proximate causes. The servitude
of the people, the heavy taxes, the unequal manner in which they were
levied, the invidious privileges of the nobles, their exclusive possession
of places of honour in the army and in the State, the ability and ambi-
tion of the middle classes who saw themselves shut out from these
places of honour, the system of lettres de cachet, the immorality of the
reign of Louis XV., the writings of Montesquieu, Voltaire, and
Rousseau, which opened the eyes of the people to the hollow nature of
those rights which were so strongly insisted on and so proudly vaunted
by the nobility and higher clergy, the support given by France to the
American insurgents which brought her into contact with revolution-
ary principles, the enthusiastic and slightly infatuated manner in
which some of the higher classes advocated these principles, the
excitement induced by the extraordinary financial crisis which neces-
sitated the convocation of the States-General, all combined to turn
that Assembly, convened merely to meet a monetary difficulty, into a
Revolutionary Parliament, and made it an outlet for the pent-up
passions of the people, through which, rushing in frenzied fury, they
spread horror and desolation over the fair fields of France.
The fifth day of May, 1879, was fixed for the meeting of the States
General, which consisted of deputies from each of the three orders, the
Nobility, the Clergy, and the Tiers Etat, or Commoners. The number
was 1,200, being 600 of the Tiers Etat, 300 of the nobles, and 300 of
the clergy. Among the Tiers Etat more than 300 were jurists, advo-
cates, or magistrates. On the 4th of May, the King, his family, his
ministers, and the deputies of the three orders, walked in procession
from the Church of Notre Dame to that of St. Louis to hear mass.
This ceremony took place amid universal congratulation, and the next
day the States-General met.
A dispute having arisen as to whether the deputies of the different
orders should meet in one room, or whether the clergy and nobles
should meet apart from the Tiers Etat, the latter strongly insisted that
the deliberations should take place in common, as they would then be
equal in power to the higher classes, whereas if the two orders
deliberated separately, each order would have a vote, and the two
privileged classes thus be able to out-vote the Commoners. The nobles
and clergy would not yield, and for some weeks the Assembly was
inactive, the deputies of the Tiers Etat meeting every day in the great
Salle de Menus Plavisis, which had been prepared for them, and wait-
ing for the twp other orders to join them before proceeding to business.
In the meanwhile famine had overrun the country. The people were
starving. A prelate at the head of a deputation came into the hall of


the Commoners, to propose a conference of some deputies of the Tiers
Etat with a few of the clergy and nobles on the subject of food. The
real object of this deputation was to induce the Commoners to proceed
to business before the junction of the orders, and thus sanction the
meeting in separate chambers. The 'Assembly was taken aback;
4,000 spectators filled the galleries, and their power depended on the
people. If they had appeared insensible to the sufferings of the
peasants, their popularity would have been destroyed. The usual
orators were silent, when suddenly a young deputy rose, and in a harsh,
shrill voice, and a manner nervous in the extreme, yet very impassioned,
he burst out —“ Go and tell your colleagues if they are so impatient to
assuage the sufferings of the poor, let them come here to unite them-
selves with their friends. Tell them no longer to retard our opera-
tions with affected delays. Tell them it is in vain to employ stratagems
like those to induce us to change our firm resolution. Wo must recall
the attention of the clergy to the principles of the primitive Churches.
The ancient canons authorized for the relief of the poor to sell even
the sacred vases; but, happily, it is not necessary to recur to so sad a
sacrifice. Let the bishops only imitate their beloved Master; dis-
miss their carriages, horses, and the insolent lacqueys who attend
them ; let them cast away their luxuries, and convert tnose vile super-
fluities into ailment for the poor!” The prelates turned away in
disgust. A confused murmer of applause ran through the Assembly.
Eeybaz, turning to Dumont, said“ That young man wants practice.
Ho is too verbose, and knows not when to stop ; but he has a fount of
eloquence and bitterness which will soon distinguish him.” “ Who
is he?” whispered one deputy to another. It was Maximilien
Eobespicrre.
On the 20th of Juno, the King having commanded the Hall of the
Commoners to be closed, the deputies met in the Tennis Court at Old
Versailles, and there took an oath never to separate till the constitu-
tion of the kingdom and the regeneration of public order were
established on a solid basis. They constituted themselves the
National Assembly, and the Tennis Court being closed by order of the
Count of Artois, they met for a time in the Church of St. Louis.
Shortly afterwards they were joined by the majority of the clergy,
and at length, on the 27th June, by the remainder of the clergy and
the nobility, the latter only taking this step in obedience to the
express command of the King. The deputies now again met in the
great Hall of Menus, and were presided over by M. Bailey.
At this period Eobespicrre made no figure in the Assembly. That
body, accustomed to the splendid and forcible oratory of Mirabeau,
the vehement declamation of Maury, and the passionate energy of
Danton, looked down with contempt on the insignificant deputy of
Artois. Eobespicrre, indeed, owed little to the accident of personal
appearance or the seductive power of eloquence. He was a small
man. “ His limbs were feeble and angular, his attitudes affected,
his gestures ungraceful.” “ His forehead,” says Lamartine, “ was
good, but small and projecting over the temples, as if enlarged by the
mass and embarrassed movement of his thoughts ; his eyes, much
veiled by their lids, and very sharp at the extremities, w'ere deeply


buried in the cavities of their orbits ; his mouth was large, his Ups
thin and disagreeably contracted at each comer, his chin small and
pointed, his complexion yellow and livid, like that of an invalid, or a
man worn out by vigils or meditations. The habitual expression of
his face was the superficial serenity of a grave mind, and a smile
wavering between sarcasm and sweetness. There was softness, but of
a sinister character. The dominant expression of his countenance
was the prodigious and continual tension of brow, eyes, mouth, and
all the facial muscles. One saw that the whole of his features, like
the whole of his mind, converged incessantly on a single point, with
such power that there was no dissipation of will, and he appeared to
foresee all that he desired to accomplish as though he had the reality
before his eyes.”
Space will not permit me to follow Robespierre through all the
events of the Revolution. I can only give an outline of his political
career, and the manner in which he gradually gained the ear, first of
the Jacobin Club, and finally of the Legislature.
His first speeches were very verbose and weak, though his reasoning
was clear and consistent. He continually recurred to fundamental
principles, and was always found advocating the rights of the people, how-
ever numerous or powerful his opponents. Mirabeau, notwithstanding
his splendid talents and moving eloquence, was accessible to the influence
of money; Danton, an energetic leader of the Revolution, possessed of con-
siderable ability and great powers of oratory, was often carried away
by the violence of his passions; other men, identified with particular
parties, changed and varied according to the signs of the times. But
Robespierre was always the same ; no bribe was ever accepted by
him; deeply and terribly in earnest, his whole soul and existence were
absorbed in the consummation of his one idea —government according to
the will of the sovereign people. He held that the multitude can do no
wrong. When accused of flattering the people, he asserted that “it is as
impossible to flatter so many millions of men as to flatter the Deity
himself.” His incessant labours were crowned with success; he
sometimes became eloquent through sheer application. The invariable
consistency of his conduct was the secret cause of his great influence.
Owing to his scrupulous honesty he soon acquired the surname of The
Incorruptible.
On the death of Mirabeau, which took place on the 7th of April,
1790, a marked change took place in Robespierre’s conduct in the
Assembly. He was now no longer the obscure, nervous, insignificant
deputy ; he had power and authority. The people had listened to his
discourses, had observed how invariably ho opposed to the ambitious
designs of more selfish men a barrier of immutable principle, troubling
himself very little about anything else. The people listened and
applauded. Robespierre represented the multitude, and the Assembly
began to feel its master. At the Jacobin Club his influence was very
great. Ho was, in fact, the organ of the Jacobins, and the latter
frequently overawed the Assembly from the galleries, the speeches
of the orators being often accompanied by exclamations, applause,
and bootings from the arbiters above.


On the 30th of May, a motion was brought forward in the Assembly
on the report of a Committee which said that punishment should be
humane, justly accommodated in gradation to crime, and in its inflic-
tion without regard to the rank of the criminal. Robespierre made a
speech against capital punishment, condemning its use in any instance,
and denouncing it as barbarous and cruel. In the abstract, Robes-
pierre was certainly pitiful; he sincerely desired the good of the
masses, but to individuals he was cold and unfeeling. Thoroughly
identified with the Revolution, and caring for nothing else, at the first
temptation of the kind which was able to affect him he abandoned
these merciful ideas and himself employed the guillotine as an instru-
ment to aid him in his designs.
The Constituent Assembly, having done its work, made a new
constitution for France on a more democratic basis, overturned many
old abuses, abolished torture, the punishment of the rack, and all
cruel corporeal inflictions except death, done away with Lettres de
Cachet, established an equal system of finances throughout the whole
kingdom, abolished the old privileges of the nobility, and thrown
open the highest ranks of the army to every class, on the 30th of
September, 1791, declared its sittings terminated, having first, on the
motion of Robespierre, passed a self-denying ordinance excluding all
its own members from the next Assembly. Robespierre felt that his
power lay with the Jacobin Club, that he was the incarnation of
their principles, and that he would have no less influence because
he was not a member of the Legislature.
He now returned for a little while to Arras, where he was cordially
received by the enthusiastic citizens. He remained there seven weeks
and then went back again to Paris. Let us take a glance at his
dwelling, and at the manner in which he passes his time. He lived
in the house of a M. Duplay, a great fnend of his, and to whose
daughter he was engaged. She loved him passionately, but he was
never in a position to marry her. The House of M. Duplay is in the
Rue St. Honore, a low building surrounded by sheds filled with
timber and plants. Robespierre’s chamber is poorly furnished, con-
taining only a wooden bedstead, a table, and four straw-bottomed
chairs, and this at a time when he is the most famous man in all
France. In this room he sleeps and studies. On deal shelves against
the wall are his papers and manuscripts, and a few chosen books, and
on the table almost invariably a volume of Rousseau or Racine.
Here he passes the greater part of the day. The only ornaments on
the walls are mirrors, and several busts and portraits of himself. He
seems to be becoming consecrated in his own eyes as the apostle of
liberty. At seven in the evening he goes to the Jacobin Club.
Unlike most of the Republican leaders, who went about slovenly and
in rags to please the people, Robespierre’s attire is scrupulously clean
and neat, and he always dresses in the same fashion. The family of
Duplay were much attached to him, as were also the few friends with
whom he cared to associate. He used to go to bed early and rise
again during the night to work. His labors were most indefatigable.
He wrote very many discourses which he delivered in the National
Assembly, and at the Jacobin Club, and still more which he never


delivered, all in the same careful and studied style, with numerous
erasures and corrections. It was owing to this unwearying perse-
verance that Robespierre at length succeeded in producing good
orations. He was not a genius, but his talents were great, his reason-
ing powerful and logical, and his style, which was modelled on that of
Rousseau, was very correct. Some of his speeches, it is said, are
models of artistic composition, and have every quality of oratory
except poetic beauty.
Meanwhile, the Revolution thundered on in its mad career, crushing
under its blood-stained wheels the nobility and the clergy, and now
threatening Royalty itself with destruction. The 10th of August
came, and a bloody insurrection took place in Paris. The mob
stormed the palace, and murdered the Swiss guards in the Place du
Carousel. A terrible red letter day for France 1 Robespierre took no
part in this horrible affair, either through caution or because he did
not approve of it. Once over, however, he looked upon it as an
inevitable step in the progress of the Revolution and therefore to be
defended. The humane sensitive man is fast disappearing, the
aversion to bloodshed, once so strong, gradually grows less. “ After
these temporary struggles are over the nation will be at liberty, and
will enjoy the blessings of equality and fraternity. But I must
beware now I hinder the advance of the Revolution or all will be lost,
and France again reduced to servitude," we can fancy him saying as
he took up his pen to defend the events of the 10th of August.
The Legislative Assembly, which had succeeded the National
Assembly, was now dissolved, and the formation of the National
Convention followed.
Into this new Legislature Robespierre was elected as a representative
of the city of Paris. On the 2nd September the horrible massacres
in the prisons were perpetrated. I need not describe them, they are
but too well known. But Robespierre has been falsely accused of
having instigated them and incited the murderers to their bloody
work. This statement is one of the many libels which the malice of
his enemies has put into circulation. It is said on good authority
that on hearing of the bloody deeds which were being performed, he
hastened to Danton, and, with horror and consternation depicted on
his countenance, urged him to employ his authority with the Parisian
populace to arrest the course of murder. Danton refused, and
Robespierre went away very sad. He left the Jacobin Club at eleven
o’clock with St. Just, a great friend and ardent admirer of him, and
somewhat similar in character, though physically braver and swayed
by a fiercer and more unscrupulous fanaticism. They went to the
room occupied by St. Just, and the latter went to bed. “ What I ”
said Robespierre, “ can you sleep on a night like this P Do you not
hear the tocsin P Know you not that to-night will be the last of
thousands, who, living men at the moment you fall asleep, will be
lifeless corpses ere you awake.” “Alas," said St. Just, I deplore it.
But, after all, those whoperish to-night are not the friends of our
ideas,” and fell asleep. Waking up in the morning, he saw Robespierre
still in the room, pacing up and down with hasty steps. St. Just
sl


enquired whether he had been to sleep. “ Sleep 1” exclaimed Robes-
pierre, “ Sleep ! whilst hundreds massacre thousands ; while the pure
or impure blood of victims runs like water down the street ? Oh, no,”
he added with a sardonic smile, “ I have not gone to bed; I have
watched like a remorse or a crime. I have had the weakness not to
sleep, but Danton, he has slept! ”
Robespierre’s only fault with regard to these massacres was that he
did not himself attempt to stop them. But he was not the man for an
effort of this sort; he had no physical courage, and subsequently
refused to excite a revolt in his own favour, when by doing so he
might have saved his life.
The next great political event in whichßobespierre stands prominent
is the execution or Louis XVI. He saw that a king in the midst of
his Republic was incompatible with its existence; he saw that the very
name of Louis drew foreign wars on the nation ; he feared to let him
go into exile, lest he should return to France with an overwhelming
army, and crush the infant fortunes of the Revolution. Terrible
necessity 1 Louis must die I No doubt the victim was innocent, no
doubt the execution was a judicial murder ; “hut,” said Robespierre,
“ Louis must perish because the country must live.” We pity the poor,
weak, helpless king ; we blame the fierce Republicans ; but let us not
judge them too harshly, nor overwhelm their memories with opprobrium
and disgrace while we soften down the execution of Charles I. of
England. The position of the leaders of the people in both cases was
somewhat analagous; they felt themselves impelled to the act in
order to preserve that liberty for which they had fought so hard, and
which they firmly believed to be in imminent peril, and it is difficult
for posterity justly to appreciate their motives and feelings. Robes-
pierre’s action in this matter marks the final cessation of his opposition
to capital punishment. He thought to annihilate the enemies of
liberty, and then to form a happy republic in accordance with the
principles he held so dear. But having once admitted death he knew
not where to stop, and the part he played in the Reign of Terror was
the result of his first concession to expediency.
On the 26th of March, 1793, after the death of Louis, Robespierre
proposed the concentration of the executive power in a Committee of
Public Safety, and a decree was passed forming the Revolutionary
Tribunal, which consisted of five judges, a jury named by the Con-
vention, and a public accuser, Fouquier Tinville. This terrible
Tribunal was the instrument of the atrocities of the Reign of Terror,
and Robespierre was elected into it a few months after its formation,
one of the members having resigned. But it is a great mistake to
imagine, because he was a member of this Committee at the time
when his name stood out most prominent among the participators in
the Revolution, that he had really the chief share in all its actions.
He helped to institute the Revolutionary Tribunal with the object of
getting rid of the opponents of the Republic, but, when instituted, he
found that he could not control it. We cannot, indeed, acquit him of
a cold, remorseless fanaticism which steeled his heart to all emotions
of pity and caused him to reck little of the sea of blood through which
ho waded, yet it is only fair to state that he sincerely hoped at last to


arrive at a peaceful shore, and that he was disgusted and terrified
at the use made by his colleagues of the power he had himself set
up.
The Girondists, who represented the more moderate party of
Revolutionists, having been vanquished in their strife with the
Jacobins and a great number of them put to death, a Committee
of Public Salvation was established. Its members were St. Just,
Couthon, Barrere, Gasparin, Thuriot, Herault, De Scchelles, Lander,
St. Andre, Carnot, Prieur, Billaud Yarenncs, and Collot d’ Herbois.
Gasparin shortly retired, and Robespierre was elected in his place.
These men held supreme control until the fall of Robespierre,
and they have received a very full measure of the censure of
posterity.
Now commences Robespierre’s career as a Minister. He is called
to the head of public affairs. How will he conduct them? We have
to record his lamentable failure. He was not the man for action.
Had he possessed the energy of Cromwell or Napoleon, he might have
invested himself with the dictatorship and established a despotism
on the ruins of his Republic. But he was too sincere as well as too
timid to take such a step. At the Jacobin Club ho began to elaborate
his social philosophy, founded, of course, on an essentially democratic
basis, and on just and equitable principles. But the time has not yet
come to put those plans into execution; the Revolution must first
shake off her enemies. Meanwhile the ideal Republic works very
well in theory. So Maximilien Robespierre dreams on.
The King having been brought to the block, the next victim was
his unhappy wife. Here no political causes necessitated the judicial
murder, and Robespierre opposed the trial. But the majority of the
Committee were against him and he was unable to save the Queen,
who was condemned and executed.
On the 9th of November, 1793, the infamous Feast of Reason
was celebrated in the Convention in the presence of the members.
The atheist Chaumette took the chief part in this ceremony, which
consisted in setting up a naked courtesan, typical of the Goddess of
Reason, to be worshipped by the Convention and the assembled multi-
tude. St.' Just and Robespierre retired in disgust, and the latter
afterwards declared that Chaumette merited death for his part in this
abominable, impious, and absurd transaction.
The Triumvirate, in which for a time was vested the chief power
of the Committee of Salvation, consisted of Robespierre, St. Just,
and Couthon. These three were at first extremely energetic in pro-
moting the action of the Revolutionary Tribunal, and in clearing the
city of all who opposed the Republican principles. But they were
not alone in the Committee ; others more unscrupulous were also at
work, and innocent blood flowed in torrents. St. Just, seeing that the
party of Danton and Camille Desmoulins was opposed to Robes-
pierre and himself, attacked these two leaders in the Convention, and
succeeded in sending them to the block. At this time nearly all the
offices of the Legislature and the Government were filled by an
infamous set of scoundrels who were desirous of nothing but their


own selfish advancement, and who disgraced the Revolution by their
cruelty and violence. Robespierre saw no means of purifying the
government but by exterminating these, and to this object his greatest
energies were now given. The other members of the Committee of
Public Salvation were not under his control; but, strange to say, he
has incurred nearly all the odium attaching to, the Reign of Terror,
while Carnot has escaped almost unnoticed. Robespierre was the
most consistent advocate and the most perfect embodiment of the
general principles of the Revolution, and, accordingly,'all the aberra-
tions accompanying that movement have been by some writers as-
cribed to his malign influence. But we have the authority of M. Louis
Blanc for the fact that the records of the period to which we refer
show us Carnot’s signature to almost every sentence of death, while
the signature of Robespierre is extremely rare. This is an important
fact, as such would not have been the case had Robespierre been so
active as is commonly believed in the murderous deeds of those
dreadful times.
Robespierre was now the most famous man in France, but his
power was more apparent than real. He lacked the qualities of a
governing mind, and himself confessed that he “was not made to rule,
but to combat the enemies of the people.” He was not a practical
man, but a theorist, and he vainly attempted to reduce to order the
jarring elements over which he was called upon to preside. The
Committee of Public Salvation was divided into three parties: the
Politicians —Robespierre, St. Just, and Couthon; the Revolutionists
—Billaud Yarennes, Barrere, and Collot d’ Herbois ; and the Ad-
ministrators —Carnot, Lindet, and Prieur. Considerable jealousy
existed between Robespierre’s party and that of Billaud Yarennes.
The latter in Robespierre’s absence, murmured and called him Tyrant.
In the Convention a party began to be formed against him, yet still
his name had immense influence. At the Jacobin Club he most
frequently arrived late, and manifested indifference to the proceedings,
showing that he did not sympathise with the designs of its members.
Things began to wear a threatening aspect for him.
On the 7th May, 1794, Robespierre made a speech in the Conven-
tion on the existence of a Supreme Being, and on the Immortality of
the Soul. In this oration he gave proof of that strong religious
feeling which was one of his chief characteristics. At a time when
the majority of the Convention were atheists, and men who would
gladly couple the march of the Revolution with their own opinions, it
speaks well for Robespierre that he had the courage to stand up as
he did, and earnestly combat for the truth of what they looked upon
as old wom-out fallacies. These men, not yet organised sufficiently
for an opposition, applauded all the violent fulminations in Robes-
pierre’s speech against priests, superstitions, fanaticism, and hypocrisy,
nut listened with incredulity and in ominous silence to his remarks on
God and the immortality of the soul.
The Bth of June witnessed the celebration of the Festival of the
Supreme Being. In this ceremony Robespierre took the chief part. In
the gardens of the Tuilleries was erected an immense amphitheatre, and
in the centre of it an elevated tribune was placed for him. He was to


act as Supreme Pontiff on the occasion. In front of the amphitheatre
was a colossal group of figures representing Atheism, Selfishness, Annihi-
lation, Crime, and Vice, which were to be set on fire by Robespierre
as a sacrifice. The deputies were seated round the steps of the tribune,
and Robespierre, amid loud and enthusiastic applause made an address
to the multitude, in which he ably and eloquently enlarged upon the
food Providence of God, and the duty of prayer and submission to
lim. This day was the proudest in Robespierre’s life. His heart
leapt up within him for joy as he listened to the acclamations of the
people, who were perfectly enraptured with this, to them, grand and
imposing spectacle; but this same day ruined him with the Convention,
who were envious of his popularity, and jealous of his power. “ With
your Supreme Eeing you begin infernally to bore me," said the
brutal Billaud Yarennes soon after to Robespierre.
On the 9th June, 1794, Robespierre brought forward in the Con-
vention, the famous law of the 22nd Prairial, by which trials before
the Revolutionary Tribunal were reduced to mere formalities,
affording no protection whatever to accused persons. His object in
getting this measure passed was to enable himself to annihilate his
enemies in the Convention. But that body, though it dared not
oppose the law, was too strong for Robespierre to make the use of it
he had intended. Mortified and sorrowful, he now ceased to attend
the Committee, or to exercise any influence over it; and the measure
he had designed for the destruction of his powerful opponents became
an instrument of the most terrible despotism. The number of
executions daily increased with fearful rapidity, and Robespierre
became heartily sick of the Terror. He was horrified at the awful
sacrifice of innocent life, but knew not how to arrest it, impeded as
his movements were by the machinations of Billaud Yarennes and
others.
It happened that a crazy old woman named Catherine Theot,
excited by the celebration of the festival of the Supreme Being, took
it into her head that she was the Mother of God. Pretending to be
endowed with the gift of prophecy, she declared Robespierre to be
another Saul, and proclaimed him the Saviour of Israel, and the
Regenerator of true religion. This absurdity was seized upon by
Robespierre’s rivals and made use of as a means of throwing ridicule
upon him. The conspiracy of the Thermidorians was now organised
by the Convention, and at the instigation and under the leadership of
Tallien, a bold and resolute man, the hitherto opposing parties of the
Jacobins and Girondists banded together to secure the fall of Robes-
pierre. The latter was aware of the impending struggle, and resolved
to make the first attack. His friends suggested an insurrection, but
ho persisted against their earnest solicitations in refusing to excite the
people to revolt, although he believed he could thus have made him-
self dictator. Whether this was owing to physical timidity or to
principle is not very clear. Robespierre certainly had on other
occasions in the early stages of the Revolution himself led insurrec-
tions of the people. But though he may have been willing to assume
the government for a time, his principles were too strong to allow him
to become the tyrant of his country. He prepared an elaborate


discourse, in which he summed up every crime, corruption, and_ dan-
ger which threatened or disgraced the 11 e volution; and alluded in an
unmistakeable manner to those upon whom he was desirous to cast the
blame. On the Bth Thermidor (26th July) ho delivered this discourse
in the National Convention. It was listened to in breathless silence ;
but the deputies, after some excited discussion, refused to print it.
Eobespierre felt that his power in the Convention was gono._ In the
evening he went to the Jacobin Club, where he was enthusiastically
received. His friends there swore that they could and would defend
him. Those members of the Club who, in the morning had opposed the
printing of Eobespierre’s discourse, were forcibly ejected. Eobespierre
still refused to act in an insurrection, and his friends determined to
proceed without him. A revolt was planned, and Henriot, the com-
mander of the artillery, placed batteries of cannon on the bridges, and
on the Place du Carousel. The next morning, when Eobespierre
went to the Convention, St. Just began the contest, and accused
Billaud Yarennes and Collot d’Horbois. But Billaud interrupted
him, and boldly attached Eobespierre amid tremendous shouts of
applause. The latter, pale and trembling, ascended the tribune. He
was assailed with cries of “ Down with the Tyrant," and a terrible
scene of confusion followed. Eobespierre in vain attempted to obtain
a hearing; he was opposed on all sides. He quitted the tribune, and
entreated the Mountain to support him, but to no purpose. Becoming
desperate, he rushed back to the tribune, shrieking in a voice cracked
with rage and terror, “President of Assasins, will you hear me?”
Yainly he attempted to gain a hearing; his voice was drowned amid
the uproar, and at last he sank back upon his scat exhausted and
speechless. “ Wretch,” cried a voice, “ the blood of Danton chokes
you.” “ Cowards,” cried Eobespierre, “is it Danton you would
avenge? Why did you not defend himP” All was now lost. Eobes-
pierre, his brother, St. Just, and Couthon were arrested, and ordered
to be sent to prison. They were, however, rescued in the streets, and
borne in triumph to the Commune. Eobespierre still held to his
determination not to give countenance to the revolt. A paper had
been drawn up, calling on the people to rise and defend the patriots
against the Thermidorians, Eobespierre was requested to sign it,
but refused. “ Then,” exclaimed Couthon, “ nothing remains for us
but death.” “You have said it,” was the calm reply. The cannonicrs
under the command of Henriot suddenly deserted him, and joined
the troops of the Convention. Eobespierre, his brother, Lebas, St.
Just, Couthon, and Coffinhal sat in the Sallo d’Egalite at the
Hotel de Yille round a table. The jingling noise of arms
was heard outside, and a party of soldiers, headed by Dulac
and Bourdon, rushed up the stairs and burst into the room.
Lebas shot himself dead, and Eobespierre the younger leapt out
of the window into the court. One of the party fired at Eobes-
pierre. The ball entered the left side of his face, breaking his lower
jaw, and carrying away several of his teeth. The party were seized,
and taken to the Convention, where Eobespierre was laid on a table
in the ante-room. Crowds flocked to gaze at the once mighty leader,
now laid so low. There he remained for nine hours, bearing the


insults of Ms late colleagues and of the mob. Some of the former
spat in bis face, and pricked bim with tbeir pen-knives. He bore all
this, it is said, with stoical apatby. At length bis jaw was bandaged
by a surgeon, and be was taken to the Conciergerie, and thence to the
Eevolutionary Tribunal, where be was speedily condemned and
sentenced with bis brother, Coutbon, Lebas, and Henriot. They were
borne through the streets on a cart, all mangled and bleeding. The
blood from liobespierrc’s wound burst from the bandage and over-
flowed bis dress. The fickle populace exulted and cursed —that
populace which but a few days before bad borne Eobespierre’s name
to the skies in its extravagant and laudatory enthusiasm. They
applauded the victors, and execrated the victims, those changeable
people, just as they bad done when Bailly and Vergniaud, when
Danton and Camille Desmoulins were borne along the same fearful
road to meet the same cruel fate. Eobespierre mounted the ladder
with a firm step. The executioner tore the bandage from bis face,
and bis jaw dropping upon bis breast, extorted from him a horrible
shriek. For some minutes the frightful figure was held up to the
multitude. He was then laid under the axe, and beheaded amid the
shouts and exultations of the crowd.
It may now be asked—what is our final judgment respecting this
extraordinary man ? This is a difficult question. There is, doubtless,
much to admire in Eobospierre’s character. His unflinching moral
courage, his honesty, his sincerity, his singleness of purpose, the
heroic manner in which he devoted his whole life to the service of the
State, his kindly feelings towards the mass of the people, his great
talents and ability—all these qualities attract our attention and
excite our admiration. This is one side of the medal. On the other
side is a strange picture indeed. There is the guillotine, and the
Eevolutionary Tribunal ; there are the base informers and the
infamous public accuser, Fouquier Tinville. Terrible work this vast
machinery makes. Innocent and guilty perish alike. Men who
really are the enemies of all true liberty, and others who con-
scientiously oppose the Eevolution are cut down together with those
whose innocence, talent, or high birth form the only ground of their
condemnation. “ What monster,” you ask, “ has instituted this
atrocious system ? " Alas! my friend, it was no monster, it was that
great and sincere philanthropist, Maximilien Eobespierre! It is true
he does not approve of the working of his machine, hut for a long
time he tacitly assents to the crimes of his colleagues, and makes no
attempt to save a single victim. His fanaticism, moreover, causes
him to throw aside his scruples about judicial murder, and now his
hands are red with the blood of all whom ho believes to stand in
opposition to the Eevolution. Neither ties of friendship, emotions of
gratitude, feelings of affection, or sentiments of mercy, are strong
enough to induce him to pardon any one who is opposed to the
advance of his own ideas. His vanity and intense dogmatism are
also characteristics which should not be forgotten in estimating
Eobespierre. Yet, when due allowance is made for the position in
which ne was placed, and the manner in which his movements were
impeded'and his freedom of action restrained by his co-workers, it


seems very evident that he was bj no means the bloodthirsty and
unprincipled man which some historians and many novelists have
represented him to be. His good qualities have been frequently
overlooked ; his bad qualities have been magnified a hundred-fold ;
and men have persisted, in spite of the clearest evidence to the con-
trary, in charging him with all the atrocities of the Eeign of Terror.
Let us remember that, had the Eevolution never taken place, Eobes-
pierre would, in all probability, have lived and died an obscure and
respected citizen, remarkable chiefly for his aversion to capital
punishment; and let none of us assume that, had wo lived in those
dreadful times, wo should have been uninfluenced by the force of
circumstances, and should not have participated in the crimes and
excesses which so fearfully marked the bloody rule of the Jacobins.
—May, 1875.
PROFESSOR TYMDALL’S “ MATERIALISM.”
From the “ South Australian Advertiser,” Wednesday, Jan. ‘26,1876.
To THE Editoe.
CIE —In your issue of the 21st inst. appeared an article on Dr.
Tyndall’s views respecting the potency of matter. I note with
much pleasure its calm, philosophical tone, which, you will perhaps
allow mo to say, contrasts favorably with the spirit of one on the
same subject published by you some time ago. The last-named article
struck mo as being rather too hard upon a man who had merely stated
his opinions conscientiously.
The objections so widely expressed against Professor Tyndall’s
views regarding matter are, I thmk, to a great extent founded upon
an imperfect conception of his real meaning, due partly to theinherent
difficulty of the subject, and partly to the ease with which his some-
what esoteric doctrine can be misunderstood by any one to whom the
peculiar train of thought underlying it is not familiar. At the same
time I am afraid that some of those whom he impatiently designates
“ his more noisy and unreasonable assailants,” in addition to mis-
understanding his “ materialism,” are incensed at his bold claim on
behalf of science of an exclusive empire over its own peculiar domain,
and at his refusing, in an equally scientific spirit, to dogmatise
regarding subjects which he feels bound to acknowledge himself
unable to fathom. In ybur article you take him to task for the phrase
above quoted, and suggest a want of courtesy on his part. I hardly
think, sir, that/you make sufficient allowance for the natural and


excusable indignation of a man who, speaking what he conceives to be
the truth —and that in a perfectly fair and courteous manner, as did
the Professor in his famous “ Inaugural Address ” at Belfast—finds
himself not only replied to by able philosophical opponents, but beset
by a perfect storm of ecclesiastical abuse, some of it from men
utterly incompetent to grasp the true purport of his speculations.
For my part, in such of Tyndall’s controversial writings as it has been
my fortune to read, I have been struck by his mildness and patience
under provocation which most men would bitterly resent.
It seems to be now generally acknowledged by Dr. Tyndall’s more
intelligent critics, and you express a similar opinion, that his so-called
materialistic views are somewhat different from those of ordinary
materialists, though you assert that they are “ more absolutely and
utterly materialistic than any.” According to my conception of his
ideas, it would be more correct to call him a spiritualist, out this, of
course, not in the sense which has been familiarised to us by the
vagaries of “ Katie King ” and others. The charge of materialism
arises mainly from the following passage in the Belfast address: —
“ Abandoning all disguise, the confession that I feel bound to make
before you is, that I prolong the vision backward across the boundary
of the experimental evidence, and discern in that matter which we in
our ignorance, and notwithstanding our professed reverence for its
Creator, have hitherto covered with opprobrium, the promise and
potency of every form of life.” And you quote as follows from the
Professor’s article in the Fortnightly for November last:—“ Matter I
define as the mysterious thing by which all this is accomplished."
Now upon first perusal, these two sentences, taken by themselves, do
certainty sound like rank materialism. But to say nothing of
Tyndall’s own explanation, a little attention to the former paragraph
will show it to be very suggestive of something extremely different
from this. “ That matter which we have hitherto covered with
opprobrium.” Does not this imply something worthy of consideration P
The fact is, that Tyndall, as his theories present themselves to me,
simply regards what we call “ matter ” as the outward manifestation of
a force which underlies external nature, and manifests itself not only
in matter, not only in the imponderables (electricity, heat, and other
powers), but also in the phenomena of human life, thought, and
emotion. How far is such a philosophy as this removed from gross
materialism! How little will it support the corollaries you annex to
Tyndall’s theories, namely, “That the soul is a product of mere
matter. The genius of Shakespeare was evolved out of existing atoms.
All things that we can see, or hear, or feel in the heavens above, or on
the earth beneath have had a merely material origin. Matter they
are, and unto matter they will return. 5 ’
Looked at from a strictly scientific aspect, matter cannot be known
by us. We only know that our senses are affected by some force or
forces ; and even if we get over the initial difficulty that proved too
strong for Bishop Berkeley, and convince ourselves that these forces
are outside of us, still we cannot find matter, as ordinarily understood.
My first perusal of the famous “ materialistic ” sentence I have quoted
was in reading an article directed against it, in which the explanation


given in the address is utterly ignored. Still I could not believe but
that the Professor, when using the expressions I have quoted, bad bad
some such meaning in view as I have endeavored to state. On turning
to bis published address I found, immediately following the obnoxious
paragraph, an explanation, which with your permission I will quote, as
it gives the key to all Tyndall’s speculations regarding matter.
“ The ‘ materialism ’ here enunciated.” says the Professor, “ may
ho different from what you suppose, and I therefore crave your
gracious patience to the end. ‘ The question of an external world,’
says Mr. J. S. Mill, ‘is the great battle-ground of metaphysics.’ Mr.
Mill himself reduces external phenomena to ‘possibilities of sensation.’
Kant, as we have seen, made time and space ‘ forms ’ of our own
intuitions. Fichte, having first, by the inexorable logic of his under-
standing, proved himself to he a mere link in that chain of eternal
causation which holds so rigidly in nature, violently broke the chain
by making nature and all that it inherit an apparition of his own
mind. And it is by no means easy to combat such notions ; for when
I say I see you, and that I have not the least doubt about it, the reply is
that what lam really conscious of is an affection of my own retina; and
if I urge that I can check my sight of you by touching you, the retort
would lie that I am equally transgressing the limits of fact, for what
I am really conscious of is, not that you are there, but that the nerves
of my hand have undergone a change. All we hear, and see, and touch,
and taste, and smell, are, it would be urged, mere variations of our
own condition, beyond which, even to the extent of a hair’s breadth, we
cannot go. That anything answering to our impressions exists outside
of ourselves is not a fact, hut an inference, to which all validity would
he denied by an idealist like Berkeley, or by a sceptic like Hume.
Mr. Spencer takes another line. With him, as with the uneducated
man, there is no doubt or question as to the existence of an external
world. But he differs from the uneducated, who think that the world
really is what consciousness represents it to be. Our states of con-
sciousness are mere symbols of an outside entity which produces them
and determines the order of their succession, but the real nature of
which we can never know. In fact, the whole process of evolution is
the manifestation of a Power absolutely inscrutable to the intellect of
man. As little in our day as in the days of Job can man by searching
find this Power out. Considered fundamentally, it is by the operation
of an insoluble mystery that life is evolved, species differentiated, and
mind unfolded from their prepotent elements in the immeasurable
past. There is, you will observe, no very rank materialism here.”
When you say that Tyndall’s views “ are opposed by nearly all
teachers of science, both in the past and present,” I venture, with
great respect, to think that this opinion is founded upon a misconcep-
tion of his meaning. You believe that “mind is infinitely above
matter,” and that it had “ exercised itself upon matter before the
simplest phenomena of the visible universe could he brought about.”
The hypothesis that mind and matter alike are manifestations of a
mysterious, incomprehensible force, while presenting difficulties if
accepted, presents greater ones in the way of its rejection, and is
altogether beyond the scope of the objections just quoted. You cite


his assertions that “one cannot satisfy the human understanding in its
demand for logical continuity between molecular processes and the
phenomena of the human mind,” and that “ this is a rock on which
materialism must inevitably split, whenever it pretends to be a,
complete philosophy of the human mind,” as evidence that he is
discontented with the position that he still vehemently defends. In
the Spectator of the 6th November last the same words are quoted,
and made the basis of a vigorous, but, as it seems to me, an unsuppor-
table charge of inconsistency. The sentences in question are
confronted by the writer of the article in the Spectator with the
Professor’s opinion that “were not man’s origin implicated, we should
accept without a murmur the derivation of animal and vegetable life
from what we call inorganic nature.” Says the critic : —“ The only
flaw, he now says, in the materialistic argument is, not its inability to
bridge the gulf between molecules and consciousness, on which he had
previouslyinsisted,butonly man’s dislike to face the conclusions of pure
intellect when they are disagreeable to himself. . . . That very
materialistic argument on the hopeless and ineradicable flaw_ in which
he had previously insisted when he overwhelmed his critics with
reproaches for failing to recognize that he had seen and pointed out its
shortcomings, he now finds one of ‘ unmitigated strength.’ ”
It behoves ordinary mortals to be careful how they interfere in a
conflict between a journal like the Spectator and a man like Tyndall.
“ ’Tis dangerous, when the baser nature comes
Between the pass and fell incensed points
Of mighty opposites."
And yet I cannot but think that even the Spectator has utterly
misunderstood the Professor’s theory. What becomes of its criticism
and of the alleged discrepancies under the light thrown upon Tyndall’s
opinions by the explanation I have quoted from the Belfast address P
When he asserts the hopelessness of materialism establishing any
pretensions to be a complete philosophy of the human mind, he means,
of course, that between the phenomena of matter and those of mind
there exists an impassable gulf, which, under the conditions of our
limited intellects, prevents any real comprehension of the actual
connection between them, and a fortiori makes totally impossible and
inconceivable any resolution of mental into material phenomena. But
this opinion is not, I think, inconsistent with the belief that mind and
matter alike are manifestations of a recondite entity or power, and
that what we call matter being in reality the effect of unknown forces,
may, as such effect have, or rather exhibit, a potency and life which is
altogether foreign to the inert substance which it has so long been
supposed to be. I must confess that years ago I felt a dread of
materialism. This was overcome long before the Belfast address by a
consideration of the complete impossibility of ever reducing thought
into what is ordinarily called matter. Tyndall’s speculations, so far
from weakening this position, seem to me to strengthen it immensely.
For, while it is impossible to bridge the gulf between the brain
molecules and intellect, we know that there is some connection between
them, and the hypothesis, unverifiablc but probable, that they are


both signs of an ultimate force, though it does not explain the
connection, certainly renders it conceivable.
In that remarkable work, Buckle’s History of Civilization, the
author, in the course of an examination of the Scotch intellect during
the eighteenth century, shows by quotations from Leslie and other
eminent physicists, that even then the idea of life as the property of
all matter was advanced, and that the classification of bodies into
animate and inanimate, or into organic and inorganic, was regarded
merely as a provisional arrangement destined eventually to be merged
in a wider and higher scheme.
This shows that as regards a very important part of the subject
under discussion, Professor Tyndall does not occupy such an isolated
standpoint as you seem to think. But then, you say, that “in refusing
to admit the idea of a First Cause, a Supreme Mind, a Creator, and
confining all potency to material atoms, he has gone further than any
philosopher of note since the days of Democritus.” This remark, ana
the thoughts thereby suggested, trench closely upon what is to me,
under all the light that has been thrown upon it, the most difficult
and delicate question that can be propounded, and one dangerously
apt to raise the feeling known as odium theologicum. But, if I correctly
apprehend Dr. Tyndall’s position, he not only docs not “ refuse to
admit the idea of a Supreme Mind,” but evidences a deep and reverent
appreciation and feeling of those unfathomable mysteries and emotions
which are the well-spring of both poetry and religion. “ Nor am I
anxious,” he says in the article you have reviewed, “ to shut out the
idea that the life here spoken of” (that is, of inorganic, vegetable,
and animal nature), “ may be but a subordinate part and function of
a higher life, as the living, moving blood is subordinate to the living
man, I resist no such idea as long as it is not dogmatically imposed.
Left for the human mind freely to operate upon, the idea has ethical
vitality, but, stiffened into a dogma, the inner force disappears, and
the outward yoke of a usurping hierarchy takes its place.” I cannot
see that this is consistent with your charge of what amounts to atheism.
It is true that Tyndall has great doubts about the ability of our finite
intellects to conceive and grasp the Infinite ; but I fail to perceive
how such doubts can be evidence of dogmatism and presumption,
while I venture to think these may be found in many who are so bold
as to declare that they have discovered “ the whole counsel of God.”
In the sentence I have above italicised, Professor Tyndall indicates a
vast and grand idea, which is somewhat similar to that of Mr. Herbert
Spencer, that the consciousness of the Supreme may be as different
from, and as far transcending that of man, as the human consciousness
is different from, and transcends the consciousness of a plant. Ho
wonder that men who can conceive such ideas as these should shrink
from what must necessarily seem to them the presumptuous thought
of dogmatising upon the personality and attributes of the Creator.
In conclusion, I would deprecate the employment of sarcasm in
criticising Tyndall’s views. No weapon is more easy to use,
and more apparently effective, especially where the object against
which it is directed is an esoteric theory somewhat paradoxically
expressed. But sarcasm, though sometimes very useful, is not


argument. One thing we may be sure of—that a man who possesses,
as the Spectator acknowledges Professor Tyndall does, “ the ear of
nature,’’ and catches “ so much more than most of us of her hidden
secrets and inspirations ’’ will be able to teach, or to suggest, something
worth very serious consideration, even when, to use your own words,
he essays the impossible “ task of constructing a philosophy of the
universe.”
SHAKESPEARE AHD MORALITY.
From the “ University Shakespeare Journal,” January, 1887.
To THE EdITOE.
7ILL you allow me to make a few observations upon the interesting
• • discussion initiated by Professor Boulger’s remarks concerning
the reading of the moral element into the plays of Shakespeare P In
the flashing of the combatants’ swords it is easy to lose sight of the
real point in difference between them, especially as the origin of the
contest was an oral statement by the learned Professor which has been
only approximately reproduced. While, on the one hand, Mr.
Hebditch thinks “ it is patent that Shakespeare had no intention of
being a sort of glorified iEsop," Dr. Boulger does not assert the
absence of the moral element in all of Shakespeare’s plays. What,
then, is the real issue P
This is not so clear as it might be. But, on the whole, it seems that
Mr. Hebditch assorts that the moral element—by which, I gather, he
means the enforcing of principles of morality—is “ the motive power,
broadly speaking,” of the plays in question, and the Professor holds
“that Shakespeare had no deliberate intention of introducing the
moral element into his works.” Here we seem to have the main issue
tolerably well defined.
The contest raises a subsidiary question as to the definition of Art.
With regard to Shakespeare’s own view of this I think we need not be
in much doubt. He has himself given us a description of the purpose
of one branch of Art, that of the player, “ whose end, both at the first
and now, was and is, to hold as 'twere the mirror up to Nature ; to show
virtue her own features, scorn her own image, and the very age and
body of the time, his form and presence.” The purpose of Art in one
branch may fairly be assumed to be its purpose in all. Professor
Boulger, as reported by Mr, Hebditch, says “ that Art is the perfect


development of the imitative faculty.’’ He probably said “ the perfect
expression of the imitative faculty." But let that pass. Betweenthis
and “ holding as’twero the mirror up to Nature,” I am unable to
suggest a distinction. Mr. Hebditch retorts that, in virtue of the
catholicity of Dr. Boulger’s definition, “ a well-trained ape may enter
the portals of the ‘ Palace of Art ’ and confidently take his seat on one
of the loftiest thrones therein.” This is smart, but misleading. Mr.
Hebditch takes the word “ imitative,” which the Professor uses in its
widest sense, and ascribes to it a narrow meaning which it has acquired
in common speech, being “ soiled by ignoble use.” It is the old story
of confusion of terms, one controversialist using the word in one sense
and his opponent taking it up in another. When Mr. Hebditch can
train his ape to copy humanity in its highest as well as its lowest
aspects, he may bring it into the Palace of Art, but then he will have
destroyed the force of his illustration.
We must, however, look a little more deeply to see the real cause of
his protest. It lies in his believing, first, that virtue is visibly
rewarded in this world; and, secondly, that art should intentionally
inculcate this belief —a by no means necessary consequence. Let me
quote his own words: —“ Is not the career of our late Yice-President,
Dean Bussell, a splendid example that (sic) if a man chooses to
follow ‘ whatsoever things are just, pure, and of good report,’ his days
will be crowned with honor, love, obedience, troops of friends?
Instances of the ruin which, sooner or later, overtakes those who
would ‘ wrongly win ’ are unfortunately not far to seek, and I, for one,
have heard, ‘ curses not loud but deep ’ heaped upon the authors of
misery and wrong.” The career of Dean Bussell is one side of the
picture. What about that of his Master P
“ Behold the Leader of a vanquished cause,
His arms extended on the bitter Cross 1 ”
“ The gospel of getting on ” is enforced just now with much unction.
But “ honour, love, obedience, troops of friends ” were not the rewards
held out to the followers of Him who said “Ye shall be hated by
all men for My Name’s sake.” “Woe be unto you when all men
shall speak well of you, for so did their fathers to the false prophets’’
I recommend for Mr. Hebditch’s perusal the following eloquent
passage from Froude’s Essay on the Book of Job:—“ It was true
then, it is infinitely more true now, that what is called virtue in the
common sense of the word, still more that nobleness, godliness, or
heroism of character in any form whatsoever, have nothing to do
with this or that man's prosperity, or even happiness. The thoroughly
vicious man is, no doubt, wretched enough; but the worldly, prudent,
self-restraining man with his five senses, which he understands how to
gratify with tempered indulgence, with a conscience satisfied with the
hack routine of what is called respectability—such a man feels no
wretchedness; no inward uneasiness disturbs him, no desires which ho
cannot gratify; and this though he be the basest and most contemptible
slave of bis own selfishness. Providence will not interfere to punish
him. Let him obey the laws under which prosperity is obtainable,
and ho will obtain it, let him never fear. Ho will obtain it, be ho
base or noble. Nature is indifferent; the famine and the earthquake,


and the blight or the accident will not discriminate to strike him.
He may insure himself against casualties, in these days of ours, with
the money perhaps which a bettor man would have given away, and
he will have his reward, he need not doubt it. And, again, it is not
true, as optimists would persuade us, that such prosperity brings no
real pleasure. A man with no high aspirations who thrives and
makes money, and envelopes himself in comforts, is as happy as such
a nature can be. If unbroken satisfaction be the most blessed state
for a man (and this certainly is the practical notion of happiness),
he is the happiest of men. Nor are those idle phrases any truer—
that the good man’s goodness is a never-ceasing sunshine; that
virtue is its own reward, &0., &c. If men truly virtuous care to be
rewarded for it, their virtue is but a poor investment of their moral
capital. Was Job so happy, then, on that ash-heap of his—the mark
of the world’s scorn, and the butt for the spiritual archery of the
theologian; alone in his forlorn nakedness, like some old dreary
stump which the lightning has scathed, rotting away in the wind and
the rain? If happiness be indeed what we men are sent into this
world to seek for, those hitherto thought the noblest among us were
the pitifullest and wretchedest .... Job was learning to see
that it was not in the possession of enjoyment, no, nor of happiness,
itself, that the difference lies between the good and the bad.”
Mr. Hebditch apparently holds different opinions to those of the
eminent authorities I have quoted. As far as can be gathered from
his remarks it would appear that his conception of morality is con-
veyed in the passage, “ Do this, and you will be rewarded in this
life." Would he “ take the tremendous step of denying the opera-
tion of any moral force in the world at all ” if it were established to
his satisfaction that good and evil men are not rewarded in this life
according to his idea of their deserts ? If not, why does he cite the
career of Dean Russell, and “ the ruin which, sooner or later, over-
takes those who would ‘ wrongly win,’ ” instances of which, he
quaintly remarks, are unfortunately not far to seek? The fact is
that he would not only make Shakespeare a teacher of morals, but
also a teacher of that particular theory of morals which Mr. Hebditch
favours.
In my opinion Shakespeare was not thinking of enforcing any
particular theory of morals at all, but simply of writing plays which
should hold up to Nature a mirror as true as it was in his power to
make it. What more can the moralist ask ? When the artist begins
to make use of his art for the purpose of inculcating any specific ethical
theories of his own, he runs great danger of departing from the truth,
and lays himself open to controversy on all hands. Whether this
or that theory of morals can be extracted from Shakespeare’s plays
depends largely upon the “ personal equation ” of the individual
moralist. This is, in itself, a high tribute to the catholicity of the
Poet.
“ All pains the immortal spirit must endure,
All weakness which impairs, all griefs which how.
Find their sole speech in that victorious brow.”
There is one way in which Art may be conducive to the highest
morality, while not inculcating any specific ethical doctrines. Owing


to the necessary limitation of human faculties it is impossible for any
man to mirror all Nature. Hence he must choose certain limited
subjects for artistic representation. It is also not only legitimate but
necessary for him to idealize. The idealization, say of a character,
is the choice for representation of some of the distinctive attributes of
that character, it being impossible to represent the whole of such
attributes with absolute truth. In these two things, then—the choice
of a subject, and the idealization of the subject chosen —the personal
character of the artist may come into full play. If ho be great and
food, his work will show forth these qualities. If he be coarse and
ase and brutal, his work will show it, though its moral teaching, as
in the case of some of Zola’s most filthy productions, may be such
as Mr. Hebditch himself could take no exception to. The work may
be artistic, but it may be the art of the cloaca.
The essence of morality, on its subjective side, is summed up in the
words “ I ought.” If an artist does not believe that these words have
any commanding force, ho is ignoring a feeling more or less common
to all humanity, and his Art will be correspondingly defective. If, on
the contrary, he feels in his soul their sublime compulsion, his Art
will bear the impress of his feeling. This will not make it moral in
the didactic sense suggested by Mr. Hebditch. You will not neces-
sarily find in the work of such an artist a commentary on the precept,
“Do well, and you will bo happy.” But in sympathy with what is
noble and good, in scorn for what is base, in generous thoughts and
high imaginings, he will speak through the characters he depicts, and
will render to morals a truer service than by furnishing endless illus-
trations of the success and prosperity which may attend prudent fore-
thought and enlightened self-seeking.—


PART 11.
Experiments in Translation
THE EEL-KIHG.
(Goethe.)
ATI J HO rides so fast in this night so wild?
’ V It is a father with his child.
He has the boy tight in his arm,
He holds him sure, and he keeps him warm.
“ My son, why so fearful thy countenance hide ?“
“ Hast thou not, father, the Erl-King espied ?
The Erl-King with his crown and train "
“ My son, that is the misty rain.”
“ My darling boy, wilt go with me ?
And pretty things I’ll show to thee;
Many a flower on the beach there grows,
My daughters have many beautiful clothes.”
“ My father, mv father, and hearest thou not
What the Erl-fcng is telling me he has got?"
“ Be quiet, be quiet, my gentle child,
Through the dead leaves rustles the wind so wild.”
“ Come, dearest child, and go with me,
My daughters they shall wait on thee ;
The nightly dances my daughters|lead—
With delicious food they will you feed.”
“ My father, my father, and dost thou not see
The Erl-king’s daughters near yonder dark tree ?"
“ My son, my son, I see it quite well—
’Tis the shine of the willows in the lonely dell.*”
• This verse is borrowed. I met with it in reading and it gave me the idea of
translating the poem, which was done when I was ten years of age.
e 1


“ I love you, I’m charmed by your beautiful form,
And, if you’re not willing, I'll make you come home.”
“ My father! my father! he seizes on me!
The Erl-king has done me an injury 1”
The father shudders, he rides swift and wild,
And holds in his arms the groaning child ;
He reaches his yard in trouble and dread.
For in his arms the child was dead 1
THE MINSTREL’S CURSE.
(Des Saingers Fluch.)
[A Legend.—From the German of Uhland.'}
August, 1871.
F olden times a castle stood, a castle high and grand.
That proudly reared its lofty head and overlooked the land ;
And round about on every side extended gardens gay,
Where splashing fountains glittered in the sun’s enchanting ray.
Within this castle dwelt a King, a conqueror renowned;
Proudly he sat upon his throne, with all his warriors round;
And dark and stern that monarch’s face, a tyrant fell was he,
Whose wars and victories were stained by bloody cruelty.
And towards this lofty castle now two noble'minstrels go,
And golden are the looks of one, the other’s white as snow;
The old man bears a harp and rides a steed with trappings gay,
While by his side, companion true, the youth pursues his way.
The old man speaks—“ Be ready now : prepare yourself, my son.
Think over all our best of songs, and choose the sweetest one ;
And put forth all your power to sing, in gay or earnest tone,
To-day we may succeed and move the monarch’s heart of stone.’’
The minstrels gain admission now into that castle tall,
Where, throned in state, the King and Queen sit in the royal hall;
Fearfully splendid is the King, like red Aurora’s glare.
As placid light of summer moon appears his consort fair.
Then the old minstrel sweeps the chords with strange and matchless
skill,
That to the ear the full-toned notes swell grand and grander still;
The young man’s voice pours forth in song, divinely sweet and clear,
Anon the elder’s deeper tones fall on the wondering ear.


They sing of lore and beauty, of the golden age of bliss,
Of freedom and of manly worth, of truth and holiness ;
And now they sing of all sweet tilings with which men’s hearts are
thrilled,
And now of all sublime and high with which men's souls are filled.
The frivolous lordlings of the Court forget to scoff and sneer ;
The King’s proud warriors bow their heads in reverential fear;
The Queen, reclining on her throne, in quiet, happy rest,
Throws down unto the singers the rose upon her breast.
“Ye have seduced my people! ” the King in fury roared ;
“ And will ye now mislead my wife ? " then threw his cruel sword,
And pierced the youthful minstrel’s breast with dire unerring aim,
Whence now, instead of glorious song, a blood-stream gushing came.
Dismayed, as if by thunder struck, the hearers stand around ;
The youth sinks down expiring upon the bloody ground ;
The old man slowly raises him upon his charger tall,
And binds the body on the horse and sadly leaves the hall.
But at the castle gate he stops, that minstrel old and grey ;
He takes his harp, companion sweet through many a weary day j
Shattered against the marble wall in fragments there it lies ;
Then with a loud and ringing voice the aged minstrel cries—
“Woe to you, high and splendid halls ! no more melodious tones
Shall sound throughout your spacious rooms, but sad and mournful
groans,
And fearful steps of timid slaves, till, on the final day,
The avenging sprite shall tread you down in ruin and decay.
“Woe to you, beauteous gardens, so full of life and joy I
To you I show the tortured face of this poor murdered boy ;
And with the horrid, horrid sight each gushing spring shall dry,
Arid and parched, through future years deserted ye shall lie.
“ Woe to thee, cursed murderer! thou bane of minstreldom 1
Yainly thou striv’st for bloody fame, for in the years to come
Thy name shall be forgotten, plunged in eternal night,
And not a whisper shall be heard of all thy power and might.”
The aged man has spoken; the heavens have heard his prayer;
Those towers lie levelled with the dust, no spacious halls are
there :
Only one lofty column stands to tell of splendour gone,
And even this, already riven, may fall before the morn.
And, in the place of gardens gay, a waste and desert land ;
No tree bestows its grateful shade, no spring bursts from the sand;
That monarch’s name is never heard in song or glorious verso ;
His fame is all forgotten. That is “ The jlhjstrel’s Curse."


FROM GOETHE’S “FAUST.”
MEPHISTOPHELES’ SOLILOQUY AFTER HIS INTERVIEW
WITH THE LORD.
ILIEE to see the old boy very well,
And am extremely careful to bo civil;
It’s really very good of such a swell,
To be so friendly with the very devil.
FROM FAUST’S FIRST SOLILOQUY.
I have now, all philosophy,
Jurisprudence and medicine ;
And, alas ! also theology,
Studied throughout with strivings hot.
Here stand I still at wisdom’s door,
And know—as much as I did before 1
Am called “ Master,’’ am called “ Doctor ” even,
Have pulled about for years eleven,
Here and there, and in and out,
My pupils by the nose about.
Yet here I am, a dunce confessed 1
Which burns my heart within my breast.
I am certainly wiser than other poor tools,
Doctors, Masters, Scribes, and fools,
With me no doubts nor scruples dwell,
And I’m not afraid of the devil or hell.
But then all joy in life is lost.
I never fancy I know what’s just,
I never imagine I’ve aught to say
To turn mankind to a bettor way.
Besides, I feel I am growing old,
Without or glory, or gain, or gold.
Such a life a dog would scorn to live,
And therefore to Magic myself I give,
By force of the spirit within my breast,
.From Nature her darkest secrets to wrest,
That I need no longer with sweat of brow,
Give out as truth —what I do not know;
That I may sec in years to come,
All myst’ries in Creation’s womb,
Find of all power the end and scope,
. And cease for ever in words to grope.


MEPHISTOPHELES’ IDYICE TO THE STUDENT
CONTBM'
PLATING THE STUDY OF MEDICINE.
'X'HE most important of all is to find
How to get on with woman-kind.
Now, their eternal fret and scold,
So thousand fold—
All their complaints and peevish cries,
Prom one still constant cause arise.
To cure them you’ll find is easy enough.
Don’t bother with medicine and all that stuff.
But take your patient by the hand,
And softly squeeze it, you understand !
Then with glances fiery-sly,
And the devil just sparkling m your eye,
Clasp her tenderly round the waist
To see if she’s too tightly laced.
MARGARET’S LOVE SONG,
MY rest is gone,
My heart is sore ;
I shall find it never,
And never more.
Him not to have
Is for me the grave ;
My world and all
Are turned to gall.
My aching head
Is turning round.
My senses reel
As in a swound.
My rest is gone,
My heart is sore ;
I shall find it never,
And never more.
For him I gaze
On the street below;
Only for him
From home I go.


His magic talk,
So sweet, so wise,
The press of his hand,
The power of his eyes,
His lofty walk,
His noble form,
His kiss—have taken
My soul by storm.
My rest is gone,
My heart is sore ;
I shall find it never,
And never more.
Towards him I strain
With maddening might;
Oh I could I but seize him
And hold him tight,
And on his bosom,
Ah, God! what bliss !
Breathe out my soul
In one long kiss !
sons
OF THE MYSTICAL CHOIR,
Closing of the Last Book of Faust.
YEEYTHING passing
■*—< Is but a type ;
Earth’s all imperfect fruit
Here becomes ripe.
The indescribable
Here it is done ;
The eternal womanly
Still draws us on.


THE MAID OF THE MILL.
(Goethe).
PART I.—HER TREACHERY.
"VATHENCE comes that youth with hurrying,reckless speed?
* * Why did he rise so long before the lark P
Was it to pay devotion’s early meed
Within some chapel in the forest dark P
The icy stream his weary step impedes ;
With feet all bare he plods along his path;
With curses deep his anger still ho feeds,
Nursing for vengeance terrible his wrath.
Ah well! ho came from blankets soft and warm,
Where he was promised very different fun ;
If he had not retained his cloak on arm
With cold and wet he now were all undone.
The rascals there deceived and tricked him quite,
And left him almost like old Adam bare,
Turned him out helpless in the wintry night,
To wander in the chilly, freezing air.
Why he did slink so cunningly and still
After those apples that we all find sweet P
Which he so fondly hoped within the mill—
As even in Paradise itself—to meet P
He will not readily that game renew ;
Forth from the house he rushed without his clothes.
Full bitterly his folly doth he rue,
And heaps loud curses on his cruel foes.
“ I lay so happily in her soft arm,
She never said, ‘ I wish you’d go away I ’
She gazed at me with eyes of rapture warm—
And all the time intended to betray!
On her white breast I lay in restful bliss,
How lovingly her fair, soft bosom swelled!
How oft she thrilled me with an amorous kiss,
How tenderly in her embraces held 1
“ She took my love with still renewing joy,
And in her happiness could scarcely speak ;
She filled my soul with bliss without alloy—
Then called her mother with a sudden shriek.
And now a stream of her relations pour —
Brothers and cousins to the tenth degree—
One following another through the door,
And all at once commence to threaten me.


“And then began a curious sort of spree ;
Each one seemed like a different kind of beast.
The maiden’s rose they all demand from me,
As if 'twcro my fault in the very least!
Why have you all on this poor martyr pressed P
What fault in me do all of you descry ?
With such a precious treasure to be blessed
Would need a rather smarter man than I.
“ The little god of love is lively still,
And follows up in time his lawful prey.
Think you that in this old and lonely mill,
For sixteen years that rose so rare could stay ? ”
They took my clothes, regardless of my shame,
They even tried to take my mantle, too;
I can’t imagine how, in Satan’s name,
The door could let so many scoundrels through.
“ Then I arose and loudly cursed and swore,
And straight prepared through all the crew to rush,
But felt constrained to cast just one look more
Upon the traitress who, with rosy blush,
Hid her sweet face. Oh, heaven! she looked so fair!
Her relatives, with gestures rude and fierce,
Stood threatening me, but to the open door,
At last I managed through the crowd to pierce.
“ How let all maidens in the country side,
And all the damsels in the city be!
From such base traitresses both far and wide,
I’ll take good care in future to be free.
Oh, girls 1 if you must play such antics still,
At least pursue them in a decent way;
Your lovers change as often as you will,
But never bo so mean as to betray.”
Thus did this hapless wight bemoan his fate,
In the lone forest, in the stilly night;
I laugh in secret at his woeful state,
For, after all, it served the fellow right.
Now may each gentleman be thus betrayed,
Who in the night so quiet, dark, and still,
Loaves any well-born, loving, longing maid
To court a lass who couches in a mill.
PART lI.—HER RUTH.
Youth. Now, you brown witch ! you see the door!
My house is swept and garnished.
It shall not by your presence more
Be tarnished.
What sort of rank hypocrisy
Of woman s love and constancy
Is this that you are singing ?


Gipsy. ’Tis of a hapless maiden’s ruth,
Of dreams that haunt her sleeping ;
Of fickleness transformed to truth,
And weeping.
She fears no more her mother, I wist,
Nor her brother’s strong and heavy fist,
But she fears the hate of the loved one.
Youth. Sing of a woman’s traitorous acts,
Of murder and of thieving.
You’ll find for all such well-known facts.
Believing.
Sing how, with treacherous wickedness,
She robs her lover of honor —and dress—
And I will gladly listen.
Gipsy. Alas ! alas ! why will you mock P
How can I prove my pain ?
Methought I hoard my darling’s knock
Again.
My heart leapt up with sudden might.
“Why did you on that lovely night
Betray him to your mother ? ”
Youth. One wintry night, by bad luck led,
I went to see my treasure.
“ Ah! Sweetheart, let me to your bed I ”
“With pleasure!”
But all at once she gave a shriek,
And, ’ere I’d even time to speak,
In rushed her mad relations.
Gipsy. O might it only come again,
That night all rapt in pleasure;
I rue my loss with bitter pain
My treasure.
I didn’t mean to be so bad;
My wretched brother sure was mad
To treat my love so roughly.
Poet. Her tears gushed forth,
She turned around,
Of Eve that gipsy daughter,
She washed her face, with dye embrowned,
In water.
Before his wondering eyes she stands,
Her sweet face hidden in her hands,
Her lovely blue eyes swimming.
Maid of the Mill. I dread your anger, dearest heart,
But love than death is stronger,
We two must henceforth live apart
No longer.
I’ll tell you all my love and pain,
Oh! let us never part again,
But live and die together.


Youth. Oh happy day! oh yearning deep 1
I can’t repress my longing.
All my old feelings, laid to sleep,
Come thronging.
Truly, oh lore, thou liv’st for aye!
Although my maid did once betray,
I feel I must forgive her.
Maid. And if your love is strong and deep,
As once you used to tell me,
Never such blissful dreams in sleep
Befel me.
Take me, oh darling! for your wife !
Take all my stainless, virgin life,
It is your own for ever.
Both. Arise, fair sun, and greet the day I
No longer we are pining.
Our love-star now with steady ray
Is shining.
As long as rippling streamlets flow
We hand in hand thro’ life will go,
In heart and soul united.
KEffIST DU DAS LAUD WO DIE EITROHEN
BLUM?
(Goethe.)
[July, 1888.]
TV’" NOW ST thou the land where odorous citrons bloom,
The golden orange gleams through leafy gloom,
From the blue heavens the zephyr softly blows,
The myrtle still and tall the laurel grows F
Know’st thou it well ? Thither my love, with thee.
Thither, oh I thither would I gladly flee 1
Knows’t thou the house with lofty columned wall,
Warm, homely rooms, and splendour-glancing hall,
Whose marble statues seem, with question mild,
To say, “ What have they done to thee, my child f ”
Know’st thou it well P Thither, oh! now with thee,
My dear protector, would I gladly flee ?


Know’st thou the mountains and the clouds I wist,
Where mules plod slowly on through fog and mist,
Where caves still hide the dragon’s ancient brood,
Eocks tumble headlong—over them the flood ?
Know’st thou them well ? Oh! thither let us flee—
Through those dark paths, my father, come with me!
IN A DREAM.
Heine.
IN a dream, I saw my beloved,
Haggard and worn with care ;
With want and misery withered
The form that was once so fair.
One child on'her arm she carried,
And one at her side did go;
Her walk, and look, and dress revealed
Her poverty and woe.
She wandered across the market,
And face to face we met;
She gazed at me, and thus I spoke,
With pain and sad regret.
“ Come with me to my home, dear,
For you are pale and ill.
And I will cheerfully labor,
Our little store to fill.
“ Tenderly will I nurse and wait
Upon your children two;
But, above all, unhappy child I
Will I nurse and wait on you.
" And never will I tell you
Of the vain love I gave.
And when you are dead, then I will go
And weep upon your grave.’’


From Scene 21, Act IY,
SCHILLER’S “DOH CARLOS.”
June, 1885.
Persons 1 The Q ueen of Spain.
1 eesons | The Maequis op PosA-
[Tho Daupliiness of Franco was betrothed to Don Carlos, the son
of Pliilip 11. of Spain. On the death of the latter’s wife, Philip
married the Daupliiness, whom Carlos passionately loved. The
Netherlands were then about to throw off the yoke of Spain, with its
terrible accompaniment, the Inquisition. The Marquis of Posa, in
common with many other chivalrous noblemen of Spain, and with
Philip’s second wife herself, sympathised with the people of the
Netherlands in their yearning for liberty. He visited their country,
and assisted in the formation of a plan of revolt. Between him and
Don Carlos there existed a deep and tender friendship. Rightly or
wrongly, Posa conceived the idea that, owing to the vigilance of the
authorities, discoveries had been made which rendered it absolutely
necessary for either Don Carlos or himself to leave Spain, and for the
other to remain as a sacrifice to the Inquisition. Prompted as
much by the feeling that the Prince’s aid to the cause he had at heart
was more indispensable than his own, as by his love for Carlos, he
decided that ho himself should be the victim, and sought an interview
with the Queen to persuade her to use the love which Carlos still bore
her to inspire him with a devotion akin to his own.]
Maequis. I have still
A most important matter to impart,
Which now I must entrust to you. In youth,
To mo most rare good fortune came. I loved
The noble son of a great Prince. My heart,
To him alone devoted, yet enclosed
The whole wide world, and in my Carlos’ soul
I made a Faradiso for millions.
Oh, but my dreams were beautiful 1 And yet
It has pleased Providence before the time
To call me from my lovely phantasies.
Carlos will soon have Roderick no more.
The friend now ceases in the loved one. Here—
On this to him most holy altar—here,
In his Queen’s heart, I leave my last bequest;
Here let him find it when I am no more.
(He turns away, tears choking his voice.)


Queen. This is the speech of one about to die.
I trust ’tis but the fever of your blood;
Or —Is there meaning in these words of yours ?
Mae. Tell him to hold remembrance of the oath
That in our youth, in our romantic days,
We swore on the divided host. To mine
I have been true, even to death, and now
It is his turn to act.
Queen. To death, you say ?
Mae. Tell him that ho must realize our dream,
Our noble dream of a new-modelled State,
The godlike birth of friendship. Let him lay
Upon the unhewn stone his fashioning hand.
Whether he finish, or in working die,
To him be all the same. Lot him begin —
And, when the centuries have rolled their course
To their predestined aim, then Providence
Will yet again on such another throne
Place such another Prince, whoso manly heart
Shall glow with kindred fires. Tell him, too,
That when ho is a man ho must revere
The dreams of his young days, and not expose
Their tender, heavenly blooms to deadly worms
Of so-called wiser reason. Let him not
Be so misled as to give credent car
If wordly wisdom with her slanders vile
Libel youth’s heaven-born zeal.
Queen. But, Marquis, say,
What is the meaning of these words P
Mae. I lay
Upon his soul the welfare of mankind.
This I demand from him with dying breath,
With the best right of all. For oven now,
This very day, it, stood within my power
To bring the glorious mom of liberty
Upon the land. The King gave mo his heart —
Ho called me “ Son I bear his royal seal,
And Alba is no more.
{He pauses, and gazes silently upon the Queen
fur a few moments.)
I see you weep.
Full well I know these tears, oh, noble soul!
'Tis joy that bids them flow. And yet —'tis past—
The time is past. Carlos or I ? The choice
Was quick and dreadful. One of us must die.
And I must bo the one. Bather myself
Than Carlos. Seek to know no more.


Queen. Ah now,
At length. I do begin to understand.
Oh I you unhappy man t what have you done ?
Mae. Given two fleeting hours of eventide
To save a long and glorious summer day!
I must give up the King. What can Ibe
To him? For in that hard and sterile ground
No roses evermore will bloom. The fate
Of Europe rests with my heroic friend.
To him Tleave my Spain. It bleeds till then
Under stern Philip’shands. But, woe to him,
Ah, woo to him, and triple woe to me,
If I have cause to rue this choice of mine.
But no, I know him well. That cannot be.
My Carlos will not fail. For this, O Queen,
You must my surety be.
(After a pause.)
I saw this love,
Sure of all passions most unfortunate,
Take root within his heart, and had the power
To combat it; but this I would not do.
His love by me was nourished. It was not
Unfortunate for my high purposes.
The world may deem me wrong. I rue it not.
My heart does not accuse me. I saw life
Where others saw but death. I saw at once
Hope’s golden gleam in this despairing flame.
I wished, to lead him on to excellence,
And to the highest beauty raise him up.
No earthly image could I find but this—
Language denied me words—and so, to him
I but became his love’s interpreter.
My guidance ceased with this.
Queen. Marquis, I fear
Your friend filled up your mind so utterly
That I was all forgotten. Could you think
That I was quite without a woman’s heart
When you made me his angel, and to him
Gave virtue as a weapon ? Surely you
Have not considered what a perilous task
We lay upon our poor weak human hearts
When we ennoble passion with such names.
Mae. For womankind in general, ah! yes !
But not for one, for one I dare be sworn.
Or can it be that this sublime desire,
Of all desires the noblest and the best,
A high heroic purpose to inspire,
Can make you feel ashamed ? What can it be
To Philip, if a painter, gazing on
Disposed of by autnority of tne
Libraries Board of South Australia
jA .
PRINCIPAL LIBRARIAN
