

i
■




*jT
V
’ AlK
\ y C y
E v” • - -
. vA '
A m \'
K
,
C v




YOUTH BUILDS A MONUMENT




YOUTH BUILDS A
MONUMENT
J. LESLIE
Author of Home is the Sailor
SECOND EDITION
AUSTRALIA
N.S.W. BOOKSTALL COMPANY, LTD
CASTLEREAGH AND MARKET STREETS, SYDNEY


SET UP, PRINTED AND BOUND
IN AUSTRALIA BY
HALSTEAD PRINTING COMPANY
LTD., ARNOLD PLACE, SYDNEY
REGISTERED AT THE GENERAL
POST OFFICE, SYDNEY, FOR
TRANSMISSION THROUGH THE
POST AS A BOOK


AUSTRALIAN BOYS
WHATEVER THEIR AGES,
WHEREVER THEY LIVE


This story is a splendid tribute to the
ineradicable boy in every man. It tells
of boyhood days and boyhood ways
against an unrivalled background of
Nature. In Podge, the hero, Tom
Sawyer lives again in the Australian
Bush.
The Publishers.


FOREWORD
To tell of boyhood days my pen is set;
My task not difficult. Who could forget
The glamour, thrill and wonder of their ways;
Ah, who would not return to boyhood daysl
On the top of Rocky Hill, where once the old
Surveyor’s Mark stood in its pile of stones, there
is now a monument; a memorial to those local
boys who served and fell in the Great War.
Where formerly the summit could only be reached
by a laborious climb up the steep face over loose
stones and through prickly wild-holly bushes, a
road has been made along the ridge from the
south, which allows of an effortless access by
motor-car.
Of the long lists of names enrolled in the
memorial, many are of those who went over
“Rocky” in the good old boyhood days. Some,
indeed, knew Podge, and more than one, I doubt
not, with him carved their names in the old land-
mark, and surveyed the town from the very spot
where the monument now stands.
From the lookout of the rubble-stone tower,
above those long lists of names, you can take in
the same view to-day. It is changed but little.
The same rough quartzite slabs and boulders are


around you. There is the same old town with its
squares of streets, the same river, the same dark
hills to right and front, the same plains stretching
away to the left. To be sure, everything does
seem smaller and less grand, shrunk in the passing
of years. Yet you can see —if ever you were a
boy —much the same as those boys saw in their
day.
Ah, but if you were one of them, you will not
only see those things j you will be transported,
as by some subtle magic, back through the years
to live them. You will lose sight of the town
and the hills and the river, and through a faint
blue smoke of romance —not unmisted by memory
—you will know once more those experiences and
adventures of long ago. Yes, all those things for
which Rocky Hill stands j for more than anything
else, far more, “Rocky” epitomizes Boyhood
Days in Goulburn.
J.L.
1923.


CONTENTS
CHAPTER I ‘
Paul starts school—His first adventurers a new
name —School games—Saturdays at home —Sunday
school and a broken leg.
CHAPTER II ' " " 14
Pods:e glimpses the world —The road to school Red
M ar y_The dancing bear —Mrs Bulgin s all sorts
shop—Bullock-wagons —Podge’s chums.
CHAPTER 111 c ‘
Podge goes to the river—The brickyard—’‘Crawfish-
ing->_Over Rocky—A fierce magpie—The basin—
Geebungs and gum—Catching leeches.
CHAPTER IV - - - - - ' * ‘ "
Swimming—Podge rescued from drowning—The flood
—Fish, turtles and a platypus.
CHAPTER V - 43
Podge goes to Sydney—The big city—The ships and
the sea —The Governor’s house —The red coat soldiers
—Podge explores alone —A great picnic.
CHAPTER VI 55
The Grove and the swamp—Birds and nests—-Cata-
pults and a pea-rifle—The Blacks’ camp—Roasted
snakes and possums—Making boomerangs.
CHAPTER VII 60
In the “Big”—School cadets —A daring adventure—
Birds-nesting—Some good climbers —How to get
eggs—Novel methods.
CHAPTER VIII 71
Podge’s love for the bush —Finds an ant-eater —His
curios and pets—The hair-worm —The koala —The
noisy curlew —Blue fish —Joey.


CHAPTER IX gj
A way out—lndian signals—Stuffing birds—Making
gun-powder—A Wild West Show—Chief Sitting Bull.
CHAPTER X
Forbidden ground—Bruizer and Podge in trouble—
Down the reach—Podge and his “catta”—Shooting
mopokes—Hunting snakes.
CHAPTER XI
A trip to the caves—Camp life—Driving wallabies—
Lyre birds and nests—Lost in the bush—ln a hollow
log—Koalas and young—Podge’s babies—Wallaby
soup and damper.
CHAPTER XII
Peter Noble’s store—Bruizer, Happy, Pmgv and
Podge—Shooting in the ranges—Hare' shooting—The
hare drive—Eel fishing—An eerie night.
CHAPTER XIII
Jacob, the schoolmaster—Podge tastes work—About
Podge s father A case of snakebite—Shooting a
platypus—Duck and Dude fight—Duck is expelled.
CHAPTER XIV
Podge leaves school—Plumbers’ nipper and printers’
, , Newspaper adventures—Bushrangers and bul-
“dorgs^,mS untlng * n t^le rar >ges—Snapper and his
CHAPTER XV
Podge goes to work “on the line”—Cleaning engines
, ™°, , e an apprentice—Granny Noble’s shilling and
her blessing—“ Good-bye, Rocky.”


YOUTH BUILDS A MONUMENT




CHAPTER I
Paul starts school—His first adventure—Gets a new
name—School games—Saturdays at home—Sunday-
school and a broken leg.
Sticks and stones will break your bones,
But names will never hurt you !
Young Paul Lindsay had thrilled to those words
when listening to them from behind the picket
fence of his father’s front garden. With shining
eyes and bated breath he had watched the happy,
noisy procession of school-children straggling past
to school. And with all his heart he had longed to
be one of them.
Now that he was five at last, and on his way—
his very first day, too —he was not so thrilled. It
hardly seemed possible that only a few minutes
previously, he had set out, bubbling with expect-
ancy, hand in hand with Eva Dean from next door
and her friend Bessie. Now, he was the centre of
a mild riot and through no fault of his own. He
wished Big Sister, who had waved him good-bye


from the gate, and who had taken the place of the
mother who had died several years ago, was not
so far away.
“Sticks and stones ”
“I’ll tell his big brother on you all the same.
See if I don’t!”
It was Eva Dean speaking on his behalf. Paul
blinked hard and stayed the trembling of his lips,
to listen.
“Garn,” said Jack Hood, the leader of the
tormenting group, “he ain’t got a big brother.”
“Hasn’t he now. You’ll see!” retorted Eva.
“Who is his big brother, Funny Face?”
“Why, Tom Lindsay, of course. Anyone
knows that.”
“Is he Tom Lindsay’s brother?” Jack Hood
exclaimed. “I never knew that, for one!”
“Neither did I!” came in a chorus from those
standing around.
“Nor me —or I wouldn’t have called him
names,” piped up a small voice.
“Well, / didn’t call him names, any rate!”
someone stoutly averred.
“An’ I didn’t,” Jack, the real culprit, declared
positively. “You can ask anyone. Did I, Paul?”
The whirl of events which had happened since
he left the shelter of his home gate, swept through
little Paul’s mind. First the appraising glances
that had been bestowed on him by children from
the “Big,” as the upper school was called; the


many greetings from those who knew him or
spoke to him as if they did j the “showing off” of
those who had been to school before him. “Huh!
he’d only be in the babies’ class,” they said.
It was that patronizing remark which had
started the trouble. Eva Dean had rebuked them
for it. Then his tormentors had lagged behind,
crossing the road, calling him names and even
throwing stones.
Paul looked up bravely. It was remarkable
what a difference the mention of his big brother’s
name had made. He found to his surprise, that
he knew many of the boys and girls in the big
group now congregated round him. He was glad
to see Ben Noble and his brother “Winker” there.
Their father kept the produce store at the corner
near his home. Their yard came down to his and
he often went into their place through the hole in
the wall to play hidings with them in the old bam
or to look for eggs in the hayloft. He liked Ben
and Winker. They were his mates. Paul’s courage
increased.
“I’ll fight anyone who says one word to Paul ”
he now heard Jack Hood declaring aggressively.
Don tbe afraid, Paul. I’ll show ’em—see? It
doesn’t matter if you’re a bit podgy, does it?
Better to be podgy than skinny, any day. ’Ere
hop on my back and I’ll give you a ride, Podge.’’
Ihe pick-a-back was tempting and Paul
accepted it without hesitation—and with it, the


name. Solaced by the ride, and with his little
heart swelling with pride at the power of his big
brother’s name, Paul was carried off happily, amid
a fair and attentive escort, to school.
How his eyes opened when the group entered
the gate and Jack Hood set him down in the
playground. Surely all the children in the world
were there. He had never imagined there could
be so many. There seemed to be hundreds of
them, more than he could ever count. Boys like
himself in white socks and stiff spreading Eton
collars, clean and fresh for Monday morning;
girls in tammies or calico bonnets, and neatly
ironed pinafores. What a noise they made!
He saw that some were playing games he was
familiar with at home. Ring-a-Rosy, he knew that
one, and draw a bucket of water for a lady’s
daughter. In these, the children sang as they
played. Others were playing chasings, in-and-out-
the-ring games, and horses.
Bewildered by the shouting and the noise and
overcome by the strangeness of everything, Paul
shrank back, shyly. He felt that all these girls
and boys would never let him become one of
them; that they belonged to a different world,
and he had not, as yet, been completely severed
from the small world of home.
Then someone shouted: “Anyone can play!”
and he saw Ben Noble with a long string tied to
his arms for reins, prancing and bucking and


snorting around, and everyone taking a lot of
notice of him. Ben made a good horse, that was
easily seen, and Ben was his playmate. That made
him feel more at home. Then a boy yelled,
“Come on, Paul!” and grabbing hold of him,
pulled him into the game. Before he knew what
had happened to him, he was standing in the
middle, the children skipping round him in a ring,
holding hands and singing:
Podgy Lindsay it is his name,
’Tis his name, ’tis his name;
Podgy Lindsay it is his name.
On a cold and frosty morning.
Being used to his nickname, now, Paul did not
mind the song very much. Though still very shy,
he felt happier . . . . In a short time he was
romping and shouting as loudly and as wildly as
the rest. The wonderful experience of starting
school was no longer new.
The games ceased when the bell rang. It was
truly wonderful how quickly the noise stopped
and how the children all scampered towards the
porch, where they settled into orderly lines. A
teacher stood on the steps with a gong in her
hand to secure quietness. She addressed them on
the necessity for being clean and tidy and why
they must all be quiet and well-behaved in school.
Then they did exercises: “Hands up! Hands
down! Fold arms! Clap hands!” Ordering
B


them to “Show hands!” the teacher came along
the lines inspecting boots as well as hands, and
noting the tidiness or otherwise of their hair.
When they marched up the steps into school,
Paul’s class separated from the others.
He found himself placed between two other
'boys in the middle of the front form, close to the
teacher. She set them to making strokes and pot-
hooks on a slate with a scratchy pencil. When the
slate was full, the marks had to be rubbed out with
a damp cloth —by those who had them. All were
supposed to bring these damp cloths or sponges,
but those who forgot or had lost them, simply spat
on their slates and polished them with their coat
sleeves.
Later they learned to spell and to write simple
words: b-a-t, bat 3 c-a-t, cat. These they repeated
to their teacher, chanting them in a loud and
monotonous song like the chorus of the locusts in
the trees outside. Soon they were singing boldly
out through the open windows to the passing
world. Their teacher was very patient. She had a
great deal to bear.
Then they learnt a real song:
I love little pussy, her coat is so warm,
And if I don’t hurt her, she’ll do me no harm.
It reminded Podge of old Ned, the big tabby
cat at home. He thought it was a very nice
song, but preferred the one about the clock;


There’s a neat little clock, in the corner it stands,
And points to the time with its two pretty hands;
The one shows the minute and the other shows the hour,
As you always can see on the post office tower,
As you always can see on the post office tower.
This was done with “actions.” The teacher
showed them how they pointed to the hours with
their hands like the clock, and “swung to and fro
with a tick, tick, tock,” just like a pendulum.
Podge had never seen the post office clock —not
close, that is, and he didn’t believe the others had,
either. Not one of them knew how it worked,
though they all made out they did. Some day—
he resolved —he would get his father to take him
to see it. Then he would know.
As time went on, they learned other things.
They looked at pictures—big sheets of them —of
animals and birds and flowers, hanging on the
walls. The teacher pointed them out with her
long stick (such a lovely smooth straight stick it
was, Podge wished he had one like it) and told
them about each bird and animal. And often she
told them about the bush; about Sydney and about
the sea, the ships and the countries they came
from. She told them about England where the
Queen lived and about her great Empire. Finally,
she told them about other nations whose peoples
were not white like them but black and brown and
yellow.
No longer shy, Paul enjoyed it all. He was not
afraid of the other boys now. He was one of


them. He loved coming to school and going home
again with Eva and Ben and the rest —they all
had such fun on the way. It gave him such news
to tell Granny Noble at the produce store, and Bio-
p • A ' O
bister.
Once he became a unit in the class, novelty gave
place to routine, and discipline, gentle at first,
began to make itself felt. Podge learned that
school was not all fun but that it entailed endless
little tasks and trials as well. Nor were these con-
fined to school days.
Every Saturday morning, in place of school,
Podge and his brothers had set tasks to do. There
was the yard to sweep up, the parrot’s cage to
clean out, and the dog to bath. His elder brothers
had to cut wood, and the big wood-heap had to be
tidied up. Podge had to gather up the chips from
round about it and pack them in the box beside
the kitchen stove.
These tasks over, all repaired to the laundry,
where the wash copper had been lighted, and they
were ready for a tubbing in the big tin bath.
They liked this and looked forward to it as the
best part of Saturday morning. The bath was
long, and two of them—even three—could get in
at once. They used to fill the bath nearly full
empty the copper while Big Sister was away for
the clean clothes —and turn on the tap till the
water was nearly over them. It was so lovely and
hot! They even played sending messages under


water. One would say something or tap at one
end of the bath, and the other would hold his ear
under at the other end and tell him what the
message said. Or, they would pour dipperfuls of
warm water over each other j or see who could
dive the farthest.
What followed was not so pleasant. Half-
dressed, and with their hair still wet, they were
in turn subjected to the indignity of having their
heads searched with a fine comb, while they knelt
with head bent over a sheet of newspaper. The
search was diligent and usually successful. There
w r as much moaning and complaining during the
operation, for the fine-toothed comb pulled
cruelly at the tousled hair. And Big Sister was
hard.
“Stop your wingeing,” she would say, “it serves
you right for playing with dirty children. You
should choose your company at school, then you
wouldn’t get this —well, Pm sorry if I hurt you.
There, it’s all right now 5 you’re a nice clean boy.”
Then when they were all done she would release
the four of them, each with a penny to spend for
his weekly treat.
Sunday was a day of “mustn’ts,” of wearing
one’s best clothes and attending Sunday-school.
This Was held in an old ivy-covered church set
back from the street among pine-trees. In these
old pines hundreds of noisy sparrows lived and


had their nests j and when the wind blew it
hummed a sad tune through their branches.
\\ earing one’s best clothes meant, among other
things, that boots had to be well shined and kept
cleans that one’s collar had to be the stiffest pos-
sible to find and that one’s hair must never be
ruffled from its plastered position. All this was
irksome to Podge.
One of the mustn’ts was that he dared not climb
the trees, though he could see the birds’ nests and
the trees looked easy, easier somehow on Sundays
than on other days. There was the resin on the
bark, which would be sure to stick to his best suit
and be a telltale.
There was much to be said for Sunday-school.
There was not so much restraint and it didn’t last
long. Then, Ben Noble and Frank Dean were in
his class and their teacher was a lovely lady with
a kind face and a soft voice, like music. She always
wore flowers in her belt, violets when they were
out, and she smelt so nice. Everyone wanted to
sit near her. To cap all, she called them “her
boys” and told them lovely stories. One was of
Moses and how he was found by a Princess in the
bulrushes} another of Joseph and his wonderful
coat, which Podge thought must have been very
like the crazy patchwork quilt on his own cot at
home. A third was of heaven where good boys
went to if they never told lies and never dis-
obeyed.


To those who knew their lessons, she gave
tickets with texts on and flowers and birds. These
had to be saved up, the boy saving the greatest
number, receiving a prize.
A very solemn and mournful man, with long
whiskers, read out the hymns and led the prayers.
This was not so pleasant. The prayers were over-
long and the children grew fidgety—impatient
for the happy moment they could rise from their
knees. He concluded with a blessing, then they
were free to leave.
Wildly, they raced down the drive through the
pine-trees to see who would be first to reach the
gate. Podge never was. He was always left hope-
lessly behind. But one day he started off early,
determined to be first. Pie found the gate
fastened j it had not yet been unlocked. Eva Dean
shook it impatiently in an attempt to open it.
The gate was old and its rusty hinges gave way
under the unusual treatment. As it fell inwards,
Eva skipped nimbly out of the way, the gate fall-
ing on Podge, who was just behind her, knocking
him down.
A wild scream from his companions brought the
superintendent running up, all out of breath, to
lift the heavy gate off Podge.
Stooping down, he took his head on his knee
and soothed him while he felt him all over to see
where he was hurt. Then he held up his hand
to stop all the chattering of how it happened and


who saw it first, and said very solemnly: “Little
Paul’s leg is broken!”
Podge was more frightened than hurt. The
limb was numb and there was not much pain in
itj but those who crowded around were so con-
cerned and stirred by the incident that he felt it
called for some expression on his part. Therefore,
he cried, loudly and lustily—cried all the way
home, whither the superintendent carried him in
his arms, escorted by a mob comprising at first the
whole Sunday-school congregation which grew
rapidly by accretion as it progressed. Between his
wails Podge could hear eager inquiries about him-
self and much sympathy being expressed on every
hand. It brought secret joy to his heart.
Without doubt it was an important event in his
life. Never before had he been such a figure of
interest. Though forced to spend several w r eeks
in bed with his leg trussed up in splints, he was
by no means unhappy.
His father fixed a sliding table over his cot, on
w r hich he could run his trains and play soldiers.
He had plenty of company, too. The big superin-
tendent and his lovely teacher often came to see
him, bringing with them toys or fruit or sweets.
His playmates also called, nearly always in two’s
and three’s, likewise bringing little gifts and often
staying to play with him.
At last w r hen the doctor let him get up and
move about on crutches (and to be seen on crutches


was a distinction not to be lightly regarded), it
seemed the time had been all too short. It was
because he was so young, and more especially —
Podge heard the doctor say this with his own ears
—because he was such a strong and brave boy.
Not every boy would have done it.
Soon the leg was quite well and the accident
likely to be forgotten. The glory remained, how-
ever, the glory that was his through having had a
broken leg!


CHAPTER II
Podge glimpses the world—The road to school—Red
Mary—The dancing bear—Mrs Bulgin’s all sorts
shop—Bullock-wagons—Podge’s chums.
With school days came not only a fuller life but
a broader horizon for Podge. Until then his little
world had been bounded by his own backyard and
by the railway line, close by. To climb the back
fence and watch the trains go puffing by was a
ritual with the Lindsay boys. Their father was
on the line” a driver, and when his train was
coming, he would blow the whistle to let them
know, and then wave to them as he passed. That
and Rocky Hill beyond had been the whole world
to Podge, so far as seeing went. Now came a
change.
There was a river, he found, joined by a larger
one below the school. Green willows lined them
both, and near where they joined, stood a big
jail, where a man with a gun walked up and down
on the wall to guard the grey-clad men at work


inside. Then, over the river, was the bush —the
distant, mystical bush.
Ha, that was the bush where the beetles came
from—all those shiny greeny-yellow beetles that
came flying around the house on warm evenings.
Bats came from there too, when the sea-breeze
blew from over the hills at sunset. He, Ben
Noble, Winker and Frank Dean used to wait for
the bats outside their gate when it was getting
dark, and throw their hats up to them. When they
called out,
Bat, bat, fly into my hat,
they would dart towards them, making no sound.
One did get into Podge’s hat once, and he
grabbed the hat when it came down and quickly
rolled it up. Winker said it was his bat, because
he saw it first, the others claimed it tooj but it
was in Podge’s hat, so it remained his bat. It
proved to be a funny little thing like a mouse,
with soft fur, and queer wings, made of elastic,
with hooks on the ends of them. When Podge
caught hold of it, it bit his finger. He said then
Winker could have it. But Winker refused it;
the others did too, so Podge let it go. It wasn’t
much good anyway, he reflected.
Yes, the bat came from the bush where all these
things came from, even the locusts that “galong,
galong-ed” in the trees in summer-time. Cicada,
his father said they were. There must be millions


of them over there in the bush. Podge longed to
find out just how many. The Hill, with a white
road winding down the black side into the town
was Governor’s Hill. The road was Sydney
Road, they said. It had been made nearly a
hundred years ago by the convicts, who worked
for nothing, with men standing over them with
guns, like the man on the jail wall. It ran through
the town, this road, and passed Podge’s place j
but there it had a street name. The boys went
that way to school.
Along the road every morning just as they went
to school, there came a strange, tall woman, with
a red dress and a very red face. She came from
the old Red Lion, once a wayside inn, at the foot
of Governor’s Hill. She walked slowly up the
middle of the street, and was always alone and
always silent. No one knew where she went, and
none dared speak to her. She was called Red
Mary, and everyone said the Red Lion where
she lived, was haunted. The boys kept on the
footpath and spoke only in hushed whispers as
she passed.
Another mysterious woman was Mother Forty-
Bags, who came from the old stone ruin over-
looking the river. She had bundles and bags hung
all around her, filled with things she had begged.
The boys were not so frightened of her as they
were of Red Mary, but called after her and
poked fun at her about her bundles. Usually she


took no notice. Once, however, Winker got too
close to her, and she dropped her bundles and
chased him. She would have caught him, only
she was afraid to go too far from her things. She
called him a brat and all sorts of horrid names.
Winker got a great fright, and the boys left her
alone after that.
Sometimes they stopped to talk with old Zack,
the blind man, who every morning tap-tapped his
way with a stick along the street to the cobbler’s
shop. Here he sat all day, smoking his old clay
pipe and listening to the gossip. The boys vied
with one another for the privilege of leading old
Zack across the street, though he could cross quite
well without them. He was very grateful to them
all the same, and told them funny stories in return
for their kindness.
Another old identity was Grandfather Noble,
whom Podge had known before he went to school.
He was Ben and Winker’s grandfather, but every-
body called him “Grandfather” or else “Old-
Timer.” He was very, very old, nearly a hun-
dred, they said j and he could walk only very
slowly with the aid of two sticks. He had lived
m the bush many years in the old days, and had
even been with the blacks and with the bush-
rangers! What wonderful stories he could tell
the boys, but it was not often they could get him
to talk! Sometimes he would grow very impatient
and angry because they could “no understan’ plain


English,” and drive them off, rapping their heads
with one of his sticks.
Favourite man of all —and he could only be met
coming home from school —was the old I-talian
with his barrel organ. He had rings in his ears
and long black hair, and by just turning the handle
his organ would play any tune he wanted. He
had a monkey, too —a lovely little greeny-grey
one with a red coat —that could dance and cut all
sorts of capers. The monkey would hold out his
little hat (it had a green feather in it) and cough
and squeak for the boys to put pennies in.
Once there came two men —strange dark men
who spoke no English—with a fiddle and a big,
wonderful harp. There was something about that
harp —one could feel it before one heard it.
Whenever it was about, the air seemed to throb
and call one. When it was playing, no matter
how far away, the first ones out of school would
shout:
“There’s the harp! Oh, goody, goody, goody,
there’s the harp!”
There would be a wild race to where it was
playing in front of the Star Hotel or the corner
store, and in a moment or two, all out of breath,
they would be crowding round the man, each try-
ing to be the closest to see how he made the strings
twing and twang. And they would stay there as
long as the man stayed. Only when he moved on


to another place, too far down the street, would
they go home.
Podge and the Noble boys were always late
home on the days the harp played, or when the
blacksmith was shoeing a horse in the little dark
smithy under the pines by the Star. They liked
the harp best of all 5 but next to that they liked
to see the red-hot iron being hammered out, and
to hear the anvil ring, and to sniff the smell of the
thick white smoke that came from the hoof when
the hot shoe burnt into it.
On one remembered day, there came a bear. A
whiskered man led him along the street on a
chain, stopping now and again to let him dance,
or to sit up and do tricks, or to open his mouth to
catch the things one threw him. He was quite
tame, and wouldn’t hurt a flea. One could stroke
him and he wouldn’t bite, but no one went too
close though they all wanted to. He was a won-
derful bear, and the man said (you could hardly
understand him) that he was caught when he was
a little baby in the country of pine-trees and snow
where the bear stories in picture books were made’
Along the roads which crossed the rivers and
joined near the school bullock-wagons would
come from out in the country. Each had fourteen
or sixteen bullocks yoked together in pairs. Slowlv
they crept along the road, their heads bent low
under their yokes, their bodies swaying from side
to side and the cud dribbling in strings from their


mouths. A big sunburnt man walked alongside,
his hairy arms swinging a great long-handled
whip, which cracked over the neck of each bullock
in turn as he roared their names:
“Whoa, Baldy! Gee-ee back, Darkie! Light-
ning Roan!”
The sullen eyes of Baldy or Roan or Lightnin’
would brighten as it heard its name, and even
before the lash reached it, it would quicken up and
tighten on the tug-chain.
It was great fun to run behind the wagon and
to steal a ride by hanging on the loading ropes
while the man was busy with the leaders. But
there was always a chance that someone would
call to him from the footpath to “whip behind.”
Then there would be a great scatter as the heavy
thong came whistling round the back of the
wagon.
Endless were those events of interest which
happened along the road to school. There was
old Bandy Gay, who pedalled along on his funny
old tricycle, and grew very angry when the bigger
boys called out, “Monkey on a gridiron!” And
there was the man who rode a high-wheeled
bicycle, with a tiny trailing wheel behind. There
was more than one of these in the town, but this
was the one the boys knew best, coming as it did
along their street. Many a good laugh they had
when the little wheel kicked up and the man fell
sprawling from his high perch into the dust.


One day a man came with a “safety” bicycle,
having two wheels the same size. This was the
first of its kind to be seen on the road. It was
such a novelty, that the man put on great airs as
he rode past.
The picture would never be complete, however,
without the little old shop —Mrs Bulgin’s All
Sorts Shop —where the boys stopped on the way
to school to buy marbles and tops and “lucky
dips” and “jaw pullers” and other delectables —
when they had the pennies, that is. When they
had not, they envied those who had, and stood
with their noses flattened against the plate glass
window, gazing with watering mouths at the
tempting array within. To-morrow, maybe, they
would have pennies. Then it would be their
turn. If they couldn’t get pennies at home, they
would gather some bones, or perhaps find some
old brass or tea-lead or horse-hair, and sell it.
Then they’d see.
Thus his little world grew bigger and bigger,
and so did Podge. No longer was he Jed by the
hand to school, and no longer was he in the babies’
class. He and his mates now scorned the games
they had played with the girls, and as boys found
amusements more becoming their superior sex
hide and seek, rounders, and similar games in
which both boys and girls joined, were left behind j
marbles, peg-top, egg-in-the-hat and leap-frog
took their place.


Podge, too, had graduated from being a mere
unit in the school throng, he had attained more or
less to an individuality. In each boy was develop-
ing some trait which marked him unmistakably
from his fellows.
Thus, there was Pete Callaghan, easily the best
scholar in the class, but alas, also the dirtiest boy.
Pete came from a humble home. His parents
were very poor, and it was easily seen that his
white trousers were made from his father’s left-
off moleskins. As he came in the school gate each
morning they greeted him with the chorus:
Cups and saucers, plates and dishes,
Here comes Pete in his calico britches!
It was great fun for the rest of them, but not for
poor Pete. Yet within the hour the tables turned
and the little cads who had humiliated him in the
playground would be begging to crib from his
slate. And Pete was so big-hearted he would
always forget what they had done and let them
copy.
Wee Davie Gordon—whose father and mother
were Scotch —was allowed to wear his kilts when
there was a concert or anything special on at
school. On such occasions he was much admired
and envied, especially when he recited “The
Bonnie Hulls o’ Scotian’ ” and “The Wee
Moosiej” but when the concert was over and his
kilts were off, somehow his glory faded.


Big Seymer, as he was called —for no one knew
any other name for him —was the dunce of the
class. He was a big chap much older than the
other boys. He lived in a gipsy camp on the flat
down by the river. Podge and his mates were
afraid of Seymer, for he was said to have black
blood in him; and no one durst say anything to
him when he fed himself from his coat pocket
which was full of mashed marrow or boiled
pumpkin. He dipped into this with his fingers,
and smeared it all round him as he ate, on his
clothes, on the desk and everywhere. He always
had plenty of room, for the others kept as far
away from him as possible.
Then there w r as Spencer, who came from the
nice house down by the bridge, and who was
always so well-dressed and well-behaved; so well-
dressed and well-behaved indeed that he couldn’t
join in any but the nicest and very mildest of
games. And Jim Ducket —Duck, as they called
him —was the funny boy, and made all the jokes
for the class.
Will Parker was known as Billy the Goose,
because his father was a showman and owned a
performing goose. He called it The Educated
Goose. It would take a marble out of a barrel
with its bill when Mr Parker spun the wheel
round, and that marble was the winning one.
When Will was late or absent or brought a note
to go home early, it was always the goose. He


either had to feed it, or take it to the show, or
bring it home from the show, or wash it —or do
something with it. It was a very troublesome
goose, yet it was useful. It was nearly as useful
to Will as it was to Mr Parker.
Ned Patten lived out on a farm across the
river, and rode a creamy pony to school. He was
rather famous because he came from the bush
and none of the others did. And then there was
the pony. They all wanted rides on the pony,
and of course Ned could do anything at all, or
get any favour done, in exchange for rides. He
always had plenty of apples and quinces too (such
lovely quinces, with plenty of jelly in the core)
which he passed along under the desks during
lessons for each one to take a bite.
Nobody liked Odo Potter much, because his
mother brought him to school every morning
and in the afternoon came to take him home again,
like a big baby. A real mummy’s boy, Odo was.
As for Charles Christopher Lawson Jeffries —
well, his name was enough. If anyone called him
Charlie or Chris, or anything like that for short,
he grew very offended, and refused to answer
to it. “That was not his name,” he said. “Charles
Christopher Lawson was his name —that or
nothing; so there!”
Fatty Rose came to school from along the
Sydney road. His people had an orchard, but Fatty
never brought any fruit to school. They kept it


all to sell. Fatty didn’t join in the games j he was
too fat. He only looked on and laughed. When
he laughed, they all had to laugh at the way
he shook, so he made fun anyway. Fatty’s father
drove him to school in a sulky. His father was fat
too —could hardly walk —and when they were
both in, the old horse had to go very steadily
over the ruts. When Fatty got out the sulky
cocked up at one side, and his father had to sidle
along to the middle to balance up.
Last of all there was Squeaker—Squeaker
Herbert. He was the bad boy of the class. He
was small and skinny, with a face as hard as a
rock. He never brushed his hair or cleaned his
boots, and he would fight anyone who would
fight him. He would even fight any boy his size
with one hand; or, if they said too much, he
would fight them, one hand, kneeling. He swore
too, did Squeaker, and even smoked—smoked
dry pine-tree roots, and brush seeds rolled in
paper j so he often got the class into disgrace. He
came to school only when it suited him. If he didn’t
want to come, he didn’t j and when he did come
he would do anything at all rather than do
lessons. Yet he was a great favourite. There
was something one couldn’t help liking about
Squeaker. Podge liked him, anyway. He thought
he was a hero.


CHAPTER 111
Podge g0 65 to the river—The brickyard—“ Cra-
wfishing —Over Rocky—A fierce magpie—The basin—
Ceebungs and gum—Catching leeches.
Association with boys who came from different
parts of the district, and from different surround-
ings bred in Podge a strong desire for a still wider
he!d of operations, and this led to an interchange
of visits, after school. Ned Patten’s home out on
, e . farm held the strongest lure, and Ned’s
invitation to come out there was very pressing.
But that visit, Podge dared only to dream about.
Spencer lived nearer, by the river, and not so
far from Rocky Hill. The big red railway
bridge was near his place, and Sydney Road
crossed the river by another bridge not far away
Spencer’s place meant the river—and beyond
Podge had never been to the river, though he had
always yearned to go there.
Long before he had started school, indeed, as
, back as he could remember, he used to gaze
longingly through the old parlour window at


home, over the rose bushes, and fruit-trees in the
garden, past the railway line to Rocky Hill, away
beyond the place where he knew the river was.
That scene, he remembered, was wonderful. The
parlour window had two parts, a blue pane and a
yellow pane. When one looked through the
yellow pane it was summer, and through the blue
pane it was winter.
He had never tired of looking at that pic-
ture, pressing his face first to the yellow pane and
then to the blue, to note the quick and charming
change of season. “Rocky” he knew quite well —
from the window. He even had names for the
different rocks on the summit. One was the Lion,
and another was the Horse’s Head. Often, he
saw people up there, climbing up the side or
moving about the rocks like little black ants. Some
day he would go up there himself and climb about
like that; he knew he would. But the thing he
thought most about, the thing that always held
him, was the river—the river he knew was there
but could not see.
Of course, since going to school he had learned
a great deal about it. He had even seen it, in the
distance, but as yet he had never been close to it.
One day after school he went there with Spencer.
What fun they had. They took their boots and
socks off and slung them round their necks to leave
their hands free. Then they went paddling in the
shallow parts. They caught frogs, wonderful
green and gold frogs, that hid in dabs of foam


under the weedy banks. You had to sneak on
them and grab them before they spotted you.
The frogs were very slippery, and they could
jump amazingly. And they bailed up fish in the
narrow channels and scooped them out on the
bank with their hands; and pounced on them be-
fore they flapped back into the water. Real live
fish they were!
There were deep holes too, as Spencer showed
him —places where no one had ever got bottom,
so he said. They dropped stones in these holes to
find out the depth. You could tell they were very
deep by the plonk the stone made.
Finding a tin Podge filled it with fish and frogs,
and went home proud and happy. He was muddy
and wet however, and very late. As he came near
home, he saw Big Sister at the gate. He began to
suspect that all was not quite well, and the glory
of his adventure faded a little. Big Sister was
indeed angry. She didn’t want even to hear about
the fish and the deep holes and all that he had
seen. He had been to the forbidden river! He
was punished and sent to bed supperless in
disgrace.
But punishment could not deter Podge for
long. Once having tasted adventure, the penalty
seemed rather to add zest to it —the sweetness, as
it were, of forbidden fruit. And so, after-school
hours came to be a time of varied ramblings and
explorations.


Podge and his friends soon found that there
were lots of places to visit across the river. Near
the red iron bridge, not far from Spencer’s place,
there was a brickyard, where a queer little truck
climbed up a steep railway line to bring the clay
from the pit. When it came up, loaded, it crept
up slowly by jerks, creaking and groaning as if
it didn’t want to come. When it reached the top
the bottom fell open and the clay was dumped
into the pugmill. Then the truck would race back
down the line to the pit with a great clatter, as
though it was glad the job was done. In the shed
by the pugmill a little pony walked round and
round in a ring, hooked to a pole, to wind the
truck up. The boys used to take the pony hand-
fuls of grass, and there was always a fuss to see
which one of them would drive him.
It was great to watch the men taking the clay
from the pugmill in big chunks and thumping it
into moulds to make bricks. The men let them
watch, but each new boy who came to see them
had to have his picture taken. Podge was soon
initiated. A man told him to look closely into a
shining wet brick.
“Look close,” he said, “and see your picture.”
Podge looked, then had his head pushed down
and his face dabbed into the soft clay. He was
greatly surprised. It had hurt his nose a bit. It
made him feel silly too; but he didn’t complain.
When they all laughed he said nothing, but “kept


mum,” resolving to get even on the next new
boy. And there was his picture right enough,
branded in the new brick, when it was wheeled
away with the others to be dried in the shed and
then baked.
The boys used to roll marbles of clay, and the
men would bake them in the kiln for them, along
with the bricks. They were not very good marbles.
“Claydabs,” they called them. They were not so
round nor so smooth as “muckles” or “glassies”
or “alleys,” and no one would “stake in” bought
marbles for them. But then, they were their own
make, so the boys liked them.
Near the brickyard were old claypits that had
filled with water, and in them were thousands of
crayfish—“crawfish” the boys called them. Podge
used to go crawfishing with Winker and Ben and
Duck. They would take a bucket, a reel of cotton,
and a piece of old meat the butcher gave them,
and set rows of lines along the edge. If the meat
smelt a bit it didn’t matter j the crawfish would
bite all the better. Each line was a yard of cotton
with a little piece of meat on one end, the other
tied to a peg in the clay bank. When a line pulled
taut you hauled it in carefully hand over hand,
squatting on your heels. (Sometimes the clay was
softer than it looked, and you would sink slowly
without knowing it till you were sitting in the
wet mudj then the others would have to come
and pull you out.) When you saw the crawfish’s
whiskers showing above the yellow water, you


grabbed. If you didn’t watch yourself the craw-
fish would nip you with his claws, and my —they
could nip; but if you grabbed boldly, you caught
him.
Sometimes a crawfish would have a big nest of
little eggs —green or brown—curled up under its
tail. You always threw these back. It was bad
luck to take a crawfish with eggs; almost as bad as
killing a swallow. That meant seven years bad
luck; and to rob a swallow’s nest was just as bad
—or worse.
It was quite easy to catch a bucketful of craw-
fish in an hour or two. That is, if it was not
windy ; they wouldn’t bite then. Podge always
gave his away to people who were fond of them.
They were very tasty, these crawfish, it was said;
but Podge never ate them. He couldn’t stand
the smell of them, cooked.
Rocky Hill was not far from the brick pits, and
it was not long before Podge and his chums found
their way up there. Rocky was a great place.
From the top one could see all round for miles
and miles. One could see the school, and the jail,
and the river winding round the town and out
between the hills till one lost sight of it. One
could pick out all the places in the town, and
where each boy lived, and hear the train whistle
and see it leave the station and go puffing away,
till it was right out of sight. One could see every-
thing from Rocky.
On Saturdays the boys would beg potatoes from


home, and climb the hill to bake them in a fire
they made on the rocks. Sometimes they got
apples and quinces from the orchards on the way
to the hill, and roasted them too, and made a
picnic. Then they would explore the rocks and
play hidings in the holes and cracks among them,
and discover new caves.
But the best fun of all was rolling rocks down
the hill. It was hard work, but it was worth it.
The boys would all get hold of a big one and
strain and strain till they turned it over. Once it
was started it was all right. Then it would roll
faster and faster till it went racing and bumping
down the hill at a great rate, smashing bushes and
scattering stones at every hop.
Once they sent a very big rock down, and it
didn’t stop till it had reached the flat at the bottom
of the river. Feeney Boxer’s sheep were feeding
down there —his black ram and a few others.
They hadn’t noticed them before they started the
rock; now it was too late. The rock bowled right
among the sheep and they scattered in all
directions.
The boys felt sure it had knocked one down.
Winker said it was the black ram it hit, and old
Feeney wouldn’t take ten pounds for that; he’d
heard him tell his father so. That greatly scared
them. They felt they would all be put in jail if
they were found out. So they ran and hid in a
cave —a cave no one knew of but themselves—


and peeped out every now and then to see if a
policeman was coming. They didn’t venture out
till sundown. Then they sneaked home and said
nothing about their escapade.
Down the other side of Rocky was the bush.
The “Basin,” people called it. In springtime
there were bright patches of yellow wattle scat-
tered through it, and the scent was lovely. There
were hundreds of everlasting daisies growing on
the hillside, and the boys felt sure there were all
sorts of flowers in the bush farther on—and birds
too, and who could say what else? It was very
steep down that side, and the bush was thick. It
seemed a wonderful place to go. They all thought
so, and all longed to see it.
W hat say if we go down and see what it’s
like,” said Podge one day.
“Pm on,” said Winker. Duck was willing, too.
Ben Noble said, “Mother only told us we could
go up on the Rocks j but if you’re all for p'oine'
well, I’ll go too.”
But Wee Davie wouldn’t go —not without ask-
ing. He said he’d go home, and if they asked
him where the others had gone, he’d tell them.
Winker said he’d lam him if he did} then they
all got hold of Wee Davie and threatened him,
and promised to belt him till he couldn’t stand if
he split on them. So he said all right, he wouldn’t
tell on them. He would wait there till they
came back.


At last it was settled, and away down the hill
they went. They were a bit nervous when they
got to the bottom, for they could not tell just what
they would meet. But it was all new and beauti-
ful, so they went on, with Podge cautiously lead-
ing the way through the bushes.
Kennedy’s house was at the bottom, and they
had to go down Kennedy’s lane to get to the real
wild bush and the hills beyond. A woman called
out to them as they passed: “You boys had better
not go down there,” she said; “there’s black-
fellows in the bush!” She had seen two that very
morning—wild blacks too, with spears. They were
after the" Bunyip that lived over in the Basin.
The boys were all frightened at that. Winker
and Ben told the lady they wouldn’t go near the
place if there were blacks in it. Podge said he
had no idea of going right in. He only meant to
go to the edge and look in, that was just to
see what was there. They went back a little and
sat down to talk it over.
“Huh,” said Podge after a time, “there’s no
wild blacks about here now. Pve heard my father
say they were all killed out long ago. And as for
Bunyips, I always did reckon there’s no such
thing. Who’s frightened to go down there? I’m
not, for one. Let’s chance it, if you’re all game.”
So they did, with Podge, shaking a little, in the
lead.
Half-way down the lane they heard a loud


squawk, and looked to see a magpie hopping and
flapping towards them.
“Look out,” shrieked Winker, “that’s Ken-
nedy’s Magpie! I’m off.”
And off he followed by the others, back
up the hill, screaming, as fast as the loose rocks
and hard climbing would let them.
All had heard of the dreaded Kennedy Magpie
—a most ferocious bird. But they had forgotten.
Now it was too late. There was no escape j the
magpie was too quick for them. He flew at Podge,
who was last, and pecked a piece out of his leg
just above his sock.
When he saw the blood trickling down, Podge
screamed all the louder. He and his companions
never stopped till they were almost back on the
rocks; and then they vowed that it was the last
time they would ever go down there; they would
keep it quiet too, and not say a word. Wee Davie
was waiting for them at the top as he had
promised.
“You got back pretty quick,” he said; “betcher
you didn’t see much.”
“Didn’t we? That’s all you know,” said Podge.
“If we told you all we saw, you’d be sorry you
didn’t come. Anyhow, we’ve been to the Basin,
and you haven’t. We saw lots of things you’ve
never seen.”
And they made up a good story for him, each


one thinking of something better than the last,
till he said he wished he had gone, after all.
“But what’s the matter with your leg, Podge?”
Davie asked, “it’s all bleeding.”
“Aw, that} that’s nothing. Scratched it climbing
a tree to get a possum.”
It was not long before they found a way of
going to the Basin without going through Ken-
nedy’s Lane. And so their fears were overcome.
Then they often went there. It was more wonder-
ful even than they had thought. It was all thick
bush and here and there on the hillsides there were
clearings with lovely orchards, which made their
mouths water as they looked through the fences
at the ripe fruit hanging just inside. But always
there was barbed wire and a dog, and it was said
there were man-traps set inside the fences, what-
ever man-traps were.
There were plenty of geebungs though, and
five-corners too. One could have all one wanted
of them. They grew wild, and one only had to
pick them up.
And gum! There never was such gum! Wattle
Gum! It was lovely. On the young trees especi-
ally, where the men had stripped off the bark to
sell to the tannery, it ran down the clean stems,
and there were yellow blobs of it as big as you
could cram into your mouth. When you squeezed
them in your mouth the tough skin burst and
squirted the lovely syrup all round your mouth


and down your throat —um-m! You could boil
the gum with sugar and make jujubes; or mix it
with water and keep it in a bottle for sticking
things. There were lots of hares and wallabies in
the Basin. Sometimes a hare would hop up right
under the boys’ noses, and before they had got
over their fright it would be out of sight. And
sometimes a wallaby would come plomp, plomp
through the bush and sit up and gaze at them, as
surprised as they were themselves. Then off it
would go, as fast as its long hind legs would carry
it; and Podge would say:
“Cripes, I wisht I had a gun. I could’a got
him easy.”
On the way home were gullies, with just a little
stream of water and a good-sized pool here and
there in the rocks. They stopped at these pools
to drink and cool their feet. Podge got a leech
on his leg once, a little slimy thing that drew
blood. It frightened him at first, but he soon
found out that leeches didn’t hurt, and he could
catch plenty of them —black, green and striped—
by sitting on the rocks and hanging his feet in the
water. The chemist would buy the leeches—
when he wanted any. Podge once or twice found a
good hole and got as much as a shilling for a bottle
or them. That was better than gathering bones
or old lead and brass. He only got a ha’penny a
pound for lead and a penny for brass.


CHAPTER IV
Swimming—Podge rescued from drowning—The
flood —Fish, turtles and a platypus.
All through the summer the boys went to the
river, after school. Beginners took off their boots
and paddled in the shallow, but as they graduated
they stripped off and went swimming. They had
to be careful not to go home with wet hair, of
course, so they used their shirts for towels, and
raced up and down the bank to dry off.
One day—it was a particularly hot Saturday—
Podge and the Nobles and several others were
swimming in a hole called the “Suck-in.” It was
called that because of its treacherous nature; the
water being shallow for some distance out and
then dropping suddenly into deep water —far
beyond one’s depth.
Podge unwittingly slipped over the edge, and
the next thing he found himself floating away and
struggling for breath. He could neither touch
bottom nor feel the banks. All he could see was


yellow water that shut out everything, and all he
could hear was a humming and buzzing in his
ears. He tried to splash to make his mates notice
him, but he only drifted on through the yellow
water, with that horrid drumming in his ears. He
was terrified, and it seemed to him the end had
come. Then he seemed to wake up. He was on
the river-bank, with a crowd around him. Big
Bob Noble had seen the red tam-o’-shanter cap
he was wearing as he bobbed about in the water,
and had rushed in and pulled him out, they said.
But for the red cap Bob would not have noticed
him, and Podge would have been a goner for
certain.
His mates emptied a lot of water out of him,
and then he was all right, except for feeling a
little sick. The worst of it was that they heard of
it at home (the other boys ran to see who could
tell the news first) and both his father and Big
Sister were angry with him for going swimming.
Podge could swim when he was seven. Winker
could swim before that, but Duck and Ben could
not. They learnt to swim not by themselves, but
by going down with the men after tea in the
evenings. The men didn’t care about the little
chaps going with them, but if they did go, well,
they just had to swim. Before they knew what
was happening, they were thrown in—into the
deep—and found themselves floundering and
spluttering and swallowing gulps of river water


and trying to scream for help, all at once. But
the men always watched them and saw to it that
they didn’t drown. They didn’t like these duck-
ings, especially as the water was none too clean
and tasted rivery; but they soon learned to swim.
The river was not much, as rivers go. It was
only a string of waterholes really—some pretty
deep—joined together by a trickle. That is, in the
summer. And it was rather smelly too. But with
the exception of the claypits, which were very
milky, and made one dirtier than when one went in,
the river was all there was. In the winter, though,
or when heavy rain fell, it came down in flood.
At times it was half a mile wide, spread in a white
sheet away over into the Grove and as far as the
foot of Rocky Hill. At such times a great deal
of damage was done. Orchards were swamped,
fences were knocked down, and the houses on the
flats were sometimes flooded. One house, an old
two-storied place, was flooded every time the
river rose, and more than once the police had to
go to the occupants’ rescue in a boat.
On one memorable occasion the water rose to
the second story, and the occupants could be seen
signalling for help from the upper window. There
was great excitement, and Podge was one of the
crowd on the railway bank who watched the police
bring a boat and go to the rescue. They had a
hard struggle crossing the strong current, and


when they got to the house, the occupants actually
refused to leave.
Podge hurried home at lunch-time bursting to
tell about this most extraordinary happening.
When he recounted the exciting details to his
family, they all hoped that no harm would come
to the people; though each member in turn had
something to say of their foolish and unwise
behaviour. Then Charles, the youngest brother,
listening wide-eyed, full of excitement and yearn-
ing for more, exclaimed:
“Golly, I wisht they’d all get drowned!”
The people who lived near by used to get fire-
wood from the river when in flood, by waiting
for floating logs to come down in the current.
They secured them by throwing a rope with a
weight attached over them and then drawing them
in. And when the river went down there was a
good deal of wood left about, besides other debris.
It also left waterholes in the low-lying patches,
where the boys caught fish, and small turtles.
These were funny creatures with a hard shell on
their backs that one couldn’t break even with
rocks. They had four little feet or flippers that
they used either for swimming with or for walk-
ing on the land; and a little head —for all the
world like a snake’s —which they could poke out
to look around, or pull back into the shell out of
danger. Once, after a flood, Podge caught a
platypus, washed down from up-river somewhere.


It was a most curious animal, with a beak and feet
like a duck, but thick felty fur on its body; and
its eyes were like two tiny black beads. Podge
took it home and tried to keep it alive j but he
hadn’t the proper food for it, and it died. Even
then he wanted to keep it, but at that time he
didn’t know how to stuff birds and animals, and
when the fur began to fall out of it, he threw it
away.


CHAPTER V
Podge goes to Sydney—The Big City—The ships
and the sea —The Governor’s house—The red coat
soldiers —Podge explores alone —A great picnic.
There was one thing every country boy yearned
to do —that was to go to Sydney. To have been
to Sydney added at least two inches to a boy’s
height, and placed him in a class apart where he
could look loftily down on his less fortunate fel-
lows and say, with an air of disdain:
“Huh, you haven’t been to Sydney, and I
have”
Podge was no different from his mates, and,
inwardly, he yearned for his turn to come. It
came when he was seven.
It chanced that he had been on a train before,
indeed yes, on two or three occasions, going
short rides to picnics. And once he had actually
been on an engine. His father had taken him on.
He had resolved there and then that some day
he would work on the line like his father, and


drive an engine himself. Most of the boys’
fathers were on the line —those that Podge knew,
at any rate —and they were all going to be engine-
drivers when they grew up. There could be
nothing greater than to drive an engine, to blow
the whistle, and to hang out of the cab and wave
your arm to the people who came out of the
houses to see your train go by, and to let them see
you wipe your hands with waste. Oh, the roaring
fire and the hissing steam, and the grease and —
and the hot oily machinery smell of the engine.
Gee, driving an engine was just all right!
And, of course, running trains meant going to
Sydney, and “up the country” and everywhere, as
often as one wanted to. Well, this trip to Sydney
was the beginning of all that. One had to go to
Sydney first. So one day when Mr Lindsay
announced that he was going to Sydney to spend a
few days with a relative, and that Paul could go
too —if he so desired and Big Sister saw no objec-
tion—his joy knew no bounds. He lost no time in
telling his friends all about it, and made all sorts
of rash promises to bring them all something from
those magic and illimitable resources of the big
city.
He had only one regret; young Charlie was not
to share his joy. Charlie and he, in all small and
everyday things, were perennial and implacable
enemies. They differed on nearly every point,
and the difference usually ripened to a fight, end-


ing with Podge on top of Charlie, pummelling
him till he cried quits.
But when it came to an event of such magni-
tude as this great adventure, young Charlie’s
presence and company seemed essential to Podge’s
complete happiness.
“Cripes, I wisht you was going too, Chil,” he
confided to his brother on the morning of his
departure.
“So do I, Paul; by golly I do,” was the mourn-
ful reply.
Then, seeing he had broken the last straw, and
tears were about to flow, Podge consoled him;
“Never mind Chil, there’s more times than one.
Your turn will come; and you know, Chil, you’re
not quite big enough yet, are you?”
All the family stood at the front gate to wave
as the train went by. Podge hung out of the win-
dow and waved in return, wildly shouting vain
farewells that w r ere lost in the noise of the train.
Thereafter, for the entire journey he dodged
from one side of the carriage to the other, drink-
ing in exhilarating draughts of novelty and
romance, plying his father with eager, loud-
voiced questions on each new object of interest and
wonderment until the latter was weary and he
himself could scarcely speak.
Towards evening, when the train drew near
the city, Podge had subsided into silence. All his
energy was expended and he was tired. Still, the


train swept on through a maze of twinkling and
ever-multiplying lights, the like of which he had
never dreamed of j and the noise of flitting trains
and shrill engine whistles made his own little
voice sound tiny and unreal. He was awed by the
vastness of it all the lights, the noise, and the
countless houses. He felt glad his father was with
him, and clung tightly to his hand as they
stepped from the train into the bewildering throng
on the railway station.
Noisy steam trams puffed up and down the city
streets, making a great racket and belching clouds
of black smoke in all directions. People jumped
on and off as they would a merry-go-round. Buses,
with people inside and on top, and each with two or
four horses, rattled along, their drivers high up
on the front shouting for custom. Everybody
seemed to be in a hurry, and everyone seemed
anxious to make as much noise as possible. It was
all very wonderful—wonderful and bewildering.
Podge decided he would not know where to start,
there was so much to see. But he was in Sydney,
at last. This great crowd and all this noise and
hurry this was the Big City. This was Sydney.
Podge had looked forward to meeting his
auntie. She lived in Sydney and she would be
different. Sydney people must be very smart and
clever he thought —must know ever so much more
than people who lived in the country. It made
him just a little frightened of meeting them.


But perhaps his auntie would be all right. She
would be his auntie, at any rate. He was glad of
that. He wanted to feel safe. He was growing
rather tired now, had a longing to be quiet. He
hoped his auntie would understand.
For days before he left home, he had been pre-
paring for these relations of his. He had resolved
not to say or do anything that would make them
think him a booby. He had decided to talk loudly
and boldly, and to say things that were smart and
clever. But now he seemed too tired to carry out
his plans, and when they reached the house he for-
got all about them.
When his auntie said, “So this is Paul! What a
fine little man he is. Come and give your auntie
a kiss, dear,” he could only stand still and say
“Y-es” and “N-no.”
He felt he looked sheepish, but he couldn’t help
it. Besides he didn’t like being called a little chap
—he wasn’t little. He even wished they wouldn’t
talk to him. He was quite overcome.
Tired though he was, Podge was unable to
sleep. It was all too noisy, and the place strange.
Yet he was thankful to be alone. He lay and
listened to all the different sounds outside, and
tried to think what each one meant. For a long
time he did that, till gradually the noise grew
less, and at last he fell asleep.
Next morning his father took him to see the
harbour and the ocean. They rode on a tram,


giving little penny tickets to the conductor. To
Podge, the tram seemed like a train out of its
place. It had no right there in the street. It was
so crowded with trucks and carts and carriages.
How the tram missed them was a mystery to him.
High buildings, most of them three or four stories,
lined the street, and his eyes roved over the won-
derful array of shops on both sides and the end-
less crowd of people everywhere he looked.
Then, looking down the street ahead of them,
Podge espied tall, slender poles —many of them
—pointing up to the sky, and he knew they must
be ships. A strange, fresh smell came to him, too,
a smell he had never smelt before, so far as he
could remember.
It must be the sea; he knew it was. And sure
enough, there, next minute, it was before them —
the harbour, with ships at anchor and sailors —
real sailors—on the decks and up in the rigging,
just as he had seen in books. And there were
steamers too, tied up to the wharves with great
ropes, and smoke coming out of their funnels, and
men working and shouting and hauling great cases
and bales from them —merchandise from foreign
countries, his father said.
One ship was from the islands, and men were
unloading bananas from it; hundreds and hun-
dreds of great bunches, as green as grass. Any
that were ripe and fit to eat the men were throwing
into a punt tied to the wharf. Ragged boys were


stealing them and eating them. One told Podge
they would all be wasted anyway —“dumped,” he
said.
“See ’at bloke ’ere,” he confided to Podge while
his father was busy talking, “well, ’e’s da boss,
an’ da lousy hound ud rader dump ’em in da sea
dan let yer eat a few. But we pinches ’em, we
does, w’ile he ain’t lookin’.”
What a shame, Podge thought. He wanted to
get some —an armful —and have a great big feed.
He loved bananas, and he had never had a real
good feed of them. Never as many as he could
eat. But his father wouldn’t let him. He said it
wouldn’t look well. He would buy him some
bananas if he wanted bananas. But he didn’t buy
any. Forgot, perhaps.
Farther along something was being unloaded
from another ship that smelt like coconuts —smelt
so strong and sweet in the hot sun that it almost
made Podge sick. It was copra, he learned, coco-
nut kernel—a whole shipload of it. It came from
the islands too, and had to be loaded into a bigger
ship to go to England.
All round the water was a strong stone wall—
to keep it back, he supposed j the water seemed to
want to come right up in the street. They came
to a place where there was a gap, and stone steps
led down into the water. His father let him go
down. It was so lovely and clear and green. He
could see right to the bottom. There were all sorts


of funny things in it; and fish swimming about. It
was moving all the time, as though it couldn’t
keep still. He put his hands in it; it was so cool.
It splashed up in his face, and some went in his
mouth. It tasted salt! Yes, it was salt. So it was
the sea all right j the sea he had so much longed
for.
Soon they were on a ferry boat and off down
the harbour. They passed Pinchgut (what a funny
name —and rather rude —thought Podge) and his
father told him all about the places they saw on
the w r ay to Watson’s Bay. They got off there, and
climbed the hill, and from the top of the cliffs
Podge saw the real ocean itself, spreading away
as far as he could see. It was over this great sea
that the ships came from all parts of the world.
How wonderful! They saw one or two ships,
and the smoke of a steamer. While they were
there a steamer came out of the harbour and
headed straight out —for England, most likely,
his father said. To Podge it seemed to be climbing
a big blue hill; and, indeed, when they had had
lunch and looked for it again, it t ad reached the
top and disappeared over the othei side.
There were so many things to see in Sydney,
and there was not time to see them all. But they
went to the zoo and saw all the strange animals —
lions and tigers, monkeys and many others —and
to the Palace Gardens; and the Museum, with


wonderful curiosities and stuffed animals, and a
dozen other places.
They saw, too, the governor’s residence, with a
red-coated soldier marching up and down in front
of the gate to keep guard. They could only look
in at the gate as they passed, being unable to go in
because of the soldier. But coming back, while his
father was talking to someone he had met, Podge
looked in again. The soldier had gone, so he
peeped inside. Then he went very quietly in
through the gate, then a little farther, till he could
see all the beautiful garden and the big house —
just like a castle.
My, it must be great to be a governor and live
in a house like that, he thoughtj but just then the
red-coated soldier came out of a tiny little house
by the gate with his gun and all—and yelled
“Giddout” at him, very angrily. Podge ran for
his life back to his father.
He decided he didn’t like soldiers—much.
Once before he had been close to them. That was
when the governor—from this same big house,
he supposed came to his town to visit the show.
All the school children had been taken to see him.
Dressed in their best clothes, they had to march
all the way to the showground and wait in lines
in the sun. The governor was to drive past them
so that all could see him and cheer. But after all
their trouble, ranks of soldiers came along, dressed


in red coats with spikes in their helmets, and stood
in front of them. Someone shouted at the soldiers
and they slammed their guns on the ground,
stepping backwards and squeezing the children
up tight till they could see nothing —nothing but
the red coats in front of them. So the governor
came but they didn’t see him!
What Podge most wanted to see in Sydney were
the shops —the wonderful shops that they passed
in the trams. He wanted to see them very close
and his father never seemed to think of them.
Perhaps he had seen them so often that he was
tired of them. But Podge had never seen them,
and he was very anxious to do so. So the day his
father decided to take a rest, and stay quietly at
home with his auntie, Podge slipped out and down
the busy street to see the shops for himself. He
wandered on and on, finding fresh wonders at
every step, inspecting each display of fruit, of
sweets and of toys. There were kinds of fruit and
lollies he had never even heard of. He wanted to
try them all. His little store of pocket-money was
soon spent, and not half the things were tasted.
He searched his pockets for more money. All he
could find were tram tickets. He had half a
pocketful of them, A very nice shopkeeper told
him he could spend tram tickets —buy anything
he wanted with them. They were just as good as
money.
Now his father had given him the tickets to


mind, to let him pay the fares each time. He had
been very proud because they had been trusted
to him. But now he forget all about that, and
spent them all, filling himself with Bulgarian
rock, and Turkish delight, and pink and white
coconut ice, and delicious a Noo-gar,” as the nice
man called it, and ever so many other lovely
things, besides pretty red and green drinks to wash
it all down. When the tickets were all gone he
started for home, feeling sticky and very full. He
was inclined to be sick too; but he was happy, for
he had seen the beautiful shops.
He found to his surprise that there had been
much worry and distress at his absence. His father
was angry, and warned him that if ever he did
that again, it might not end quite so happily. It
was, however, a great adventure, and Podge was
quite content to leave for home next day.
He was glad to get back to tell his friends about
Sydney. If his promises to bring back presents to
all of them were not fulfilled he more than made
up for that with the stories he had to tell. While
he tried not to appear boastful, he nevertheless set
himself up as an unquestioned authority on Sydney
—where to go and what to do when you got there.
That is, to those who had not been. For two or
three weeks he told and retold his experiences to a
circle of eager and admiring listeners. Then as
the novelty wore off, he settled down to resume
the quiet course of home life.


After all, though it had its charms and wonders,
Sydney was not everything. It was pretty noisy
anyhow, and there was something different about
the people. Home was not such a bad place, and,
come to think of it, there was such a lot about his
own town that as yet he had not even seen.


CHAPTER VI
The grove and the swamp—Birds and nests —Cata-
pults and a pea-rifle—The blacks’ camp—Roasted
snakes and possums —Making boomerangs.
Over the river, close to the town, there was a
grove of big gum-trees, and a broad swamp near
it. There were plenty of birds to be found there j
magpies, peewees, and soldier birds in the tall
trees, wrens, tomtits and other small birds in the
bushes. Podge and his chums soon became familiar
with the Grove, and used to rob the birds’ nests,
as well as shoot the birds with catapults.
It was not forbidden to kill birds. Nobody told
them not to, so they killed them whenever they
got the chance. That was strange, for Podge, at
least, was fond of the birds. To him they were
the most beautiful things on earth. Yet to kill
them and rob their nests was his greatest joy and
entertainment.
He became the proud owner of a pea-rifle about
this time. It was for his eighth birthday. None of


the boys he associated with had a pea-rifle or gun 5
not one, except Squeaker Herbert, and he didn’t
go out with them. Winker’s big brothers had guns
and often used to go out shooting. Winker was
to have one soon. His father was going to buy
him a muzzle-loader, but he hadn’t got it yet. So
Podge was the only boy with a gun to boast of.
When he went over to the Grove with his pea-
rifle, nearly every boy that knew him went with
him. There was Winker, and Ben, and Frank and
Wee Davie, and Duck, and a lot more. Young
Charlie wanted to go, but Podge wouldn’t let
him. He said it was a bit dangerous for him. He
was too little, and he might get shot. Besides
there were too many already.
Podge made them all walk behind, while he
crept quietly ahead to get a shot at a bird. They
all envied him because he had the rifle. All
wanted to carry it, and all wanted the next shot.
Podge had bought the bullets too —saved up and
bought them with his own money. None of the
others ever put anything in, but they all wanted
shots. The cheek of them! And they made so
much noise squabbling about it that they
frightened the birds away.
He decided it was no use trying to shoot with
a crowd present. One needed to be alone. That
was the only way to get birds, or indeed anything
else. And one never could tell, he might get a


hare, Podge thought, if he went quietly, and
sneaked on to him, and got close up and hit him
in the right place. Through the eye, say; that
would fetch him. His pea-rifle would kill a hare,
he reckoned. It would carry forty yards, at any
rate. But one couldn’t do it with a crowd around.
So Podge took to going out alone. Usually he
went in the mornings, before the others were
about. Often in winter, alone with his precious
pea-rifle, he would sally forth in the early, cold
hours, with the frost crackling under his bare feet,
to stalk magpies in the grove, or better still, pee-
wees or tall blue cranes on the swamp. His feet
would grow numb and blue with cold, and his
hands so stiff he could scarcely pull the trigger,
but not even that could mar the delicious adven-
turous thrill of those early morning hunting
expeditions —even though he only “winged a
magpie” or was “sure he wounded a crane.”
A tribe of blacks from away up-country came
once or twice and camped in the Grove. They
made themselves gunyahs out of bushes, by
leaning them in a row against a pole set in two
forks. They crawled under these shelters to sleep ;
that was all the covering they had. The whole
tribe came, gins, children, piccaninnies and all, and
stayed for two or three months at a time.
They ate everything they could kill in the bush.
They chopped grubs out of trees and old stumps,


killed birds, and caught possums by climbing the
gum-trees. They cut notches for their hands and
toes with their tomahawks as they climbed up, and
pulled the possums out of the hollows where they
slept in the daytime. They cooked the possums by
coating them with mud and laying them in a fire
made in a hole in the ground, covering them with
hot coals —fur, entrails and all. When they were
cooked, the fur came off clean with the crust of
mud, and the inside fell out like a ball.
They killed snakes too, and ate them. They
were very clever at finding and killing snakes.
They took the poison teeth out first and then
roasted them over the fire ; very slowly over red
coals. Snake cooked like this tasted very much
like the “crackling” of roast pork, and looked
something like it too. Podge tasted it more than
once when he visited the blacks’ camp.
The boys were strictly forbidden to go near the
blacks. They were not thought to be nice, and
they were rather dirty. But sometimes they went
all the same, to see them cooking the snakes and
possums, and also to watch them making boomer-
angs. Once they gave Podge a boomerang. He
couldn’t make it come back. There was something
wrong with it. He thought at first that was why
they gave it to him, but later he learnt that it was
the thrower rather than the boomerang that was
at fault.


The blacks made their boomerangs by chopping
and carving them from pieces of timber of the
right curve, like a gum-tree root or bent branch;
or else by fashioning them from straight wood,
and afterwards bending them over a fire.


CHAPTER VII
In the “Big”—School cadets —A daring adventure—
birds-nesting—Some good climbers—How to get
eggs—Novel methods.
Podge had, by this time, graduated to the “Big,”
as the upper section of the school was called. The
girls and boys were separated in the big. The
boys had a school to themselves, where they had
men teachers.
There were four public schools in the town,
and the boys in the big mingled more or less with
the boys from the other schools. Teams from
Podge’s school often went to play cricket or foot-
ball against “South” or “Superior,” or on the
Convent green against the “Catholic.” This, of
course, meant closer acquaintanceship with the boys
from those schools.
Podge was never very fond of games, nor was
he much good at them; he played more as a matter
of duty. Still, he liked the intercourse with new
boys, some of whom, he was delighted to find,


were kindred spirits, who yearned as he did, for
the bush and the birds.
Then there w r ere the school cadets, and this
again brought the schools into contact, for they
combined forces in order to hold parades and drill
with their dummy rifles, made of wood and gas
pipe. After they became proficient in drill they
went over the hills to the butts to learn to shoot.
For shooting practice they were given Snider rifles
of ample bore, which kicked most violently, with
disastrous results to the tender young shoulders of
the shooters. But not a murmur of complaint
came from them on that score. They were shoot-
ing with real rifles, and sore shoulders could never
dim the glory of that.
The cartridges for target practice were care-
fully served out under the eye of the schoolmaster
himself, and jealously recordedj for the rifles
were really old “service” weapons, with long
range and good killing power. But, having
learned of a source from which he could get
unauthorized ammunition, Podge conceived the
daring idea of going shooting in the bush with
his rifle.
So he got some of the contraband cartridges,
and shooting he went, over Rocky, to the Basin.
He played truant from school (this was the first
time he had wagged it, and he felt very guilty)
and made his way by back lanes and quiet paths
to his objective. The hillsides around the Basin


were covered with gum saplings and thick scrub,
and wallabies were plentiful. He found that by
quietly stalking them he could get sitting shots
at fairly short distances.
The rifle made a great report, which echoed
from one hillside to the other till it seemed it
would never stop, and with each shot Podge’s
heart beat furiously. He felt extremely nervous,
and wished he could stop the noise. But it was so
exciting he soon brushed his fear aside. Anyhow,
there was no one there but he. He made several
such secret expeditions, and actually shot some
wallabies j though he dared not take them nor any
part of them home, for fear of making his
escapades known.
When a bullet missed its mark, or glanced from
a rock or a tree, it plowed through the bush, leav-
ing a trail of falling saplings down the hillside,
or else went whining away over the bush to good-
ness knows where. This must have been noticed
by others, for Podge heard later that some of the
orchardists in the vicinity were growing alarmed
about the stray bullets that whizzed about their
grounds.
When he heard this, Podge thought that
perhaps it would be wise to discontinue, and
regretfully decided to do so. He would wait until
he could buy a shot gun, which was a less glorious
weapon, but a more legitimate one —for a boy.
He did not tell anyone about these exploits. They


remained a close secret with him. He yearned
to tell his chums all about them, for none of them
had ever been shooting with a rifle, and certainly
none of them had ever shot a wallaby. But he
kept “mum” and said nothing; though for years
he carried in his pocket and loved to exhibit to
curious eyes the tiny paw of a brush wallaby, the
cherished trophy of his first “kill” in furred game.
As has been said, mingling with the boys from
other schools brought Podge into contact with
others who were just as fond of the bush as he
was. His own knowledge of the bush increased
as his range of acquaintances widened. He got to
know many boys who were noted bird-nesters.
Some were good climbers; others were skilful in
finding nests; others knew good places to go.
When all of these qualifications were affiliated
the result was the ideal nesting party. But such
a party could only be recruited from more than
one school.
Take Ned Patten, for instance. Pie lived out
on the farm, and he could go to places along the
Wollondilly and beyond, where the rest dafen’t
go, because there were notices there to keep out.
One would be prosecuted if seen there, in any of
those paddocks. But Ned, who lived there, could
go anywhere. Yet he was quite useless at finding
nests or climbing trees. Why, he’d just as likely
look for an eagle-hawk’s nest in a willow-tree or
a blue wren’s in a stringy bark.


Now Squeaker Herbert, of Podge’s school, was
a good climber, but he was finicky, and would
not always come out when he was wanted, just as
he wouldn’t go to school except when it suited
him.
Blinky Horan was a good climber too. He went
to the Superior. He got his name because he
always blinked when he spoke to one, and kept
time to his words with his eyes. If anyone laughed
at him, that started a fight; and he could fight,
Blinky could. So that spoiled him.
Then there was Nicky Clark, from South.
Nicodemus was his full name. His parents got it
out of the Bible for him. The boys called him
Nicky for short. He could climb anything There
was never a nest built that Nicky could not get.
He would always say:
“I’ll climb it or bust,” and he never busted. But
it had to be a famous party before Nicky would
go out with it.
Podge could not climb much. He could at one
time. He was too scared now —had lost his nerve.
Ever since he fell once when a brittle-gum bough
broke with him while reaching for a leather-
head’s nest. Only for branches that broke his fall,
he would have been killed; but as it was he landed
on his stomach across a hump in a surface root
fifteen feet below, and had the wind knocked clean
out of him. He nearly broke his ribs too. Well,
he never climbed much after that.


\ ou see, a bird-nesting party was no good with-
out a climber, and a lot depended on the whims
of those who were known to be good climbers. But
such dependence did not suit Podge, and he was
led to devise other means of supplying the need.
What peculiar qualification he himself possessed
to warrant his inclusion in these expeditions to the
bush, let alone his organizing them, he never
quite knew. The man who came to the school each
year to “read the bumps” of those who brought
a shilling to pay for it, used to say that Podge had
no bumps worth mentioning, and that there was
nothing in particular in which he would distinguish
himself.
But those boys must have known something that
the old bump-reader did not know, something
that even Podge himself did not know at the time.
That was, that he had a gift for noting the move-
ments and habits of birds, a gift possessed by few
of the other boys; and a capacity for detecting
their nests and identifying them; which, summed
up, must have made him a somewhat valued asset.
Podge soon found that there were other ways
of getting eggs out of nests than by climbing for
them; also, that for every variety of bird whose
nest required to be climbed, there were several
where initiative and invention served to better
purpose.
Out on the plains there were isolated clumps of
tall trees, and these were the homes of crows,


magpies, and sometimes hawks. In the dead trees
among them, parrots nested —or rather laid their
eggs in the bare hollows. There was no option to
climbing, and it was hard climbing too. The one
who climbed the trees, took first toll of the eggs
for his services; or, later in the season, of the
young parrots and magpies.
No one begrudged him that right, for, apart
from the risk and hard work of climbing (it was
very tiring on the arms and legs) the parent birds,
especially magpies, often viciously attacked the
one who robbed the nest. Even after they had
left, and were making away for the next clump
of trees, it was not unusual for an angry magpie
to follow quietly overhead and pounce suddenly
on the retreating party, delivering a sharp crack
with its strong bill on an unsuspecting head.
Almost invariably it was the one who had climbed
the nest, that was attacked.
On one occasion Podge, who had merely made
an unsuccessful attempt to climb a magpie’s nest,
received a stunning blow which left a half-inch
cut in his scalp, in spite of the fact that he was
wearing an old chip-straw hat.
The young magpies and parrots the boys sold
around town. They usually received a shilling
for cocks, and sixpence for hens.
But not all the birds nested in high trees. The
nests of the peewees, and the larger ones of the
black magpies—both of mud —were not so high.


With the aid of a long pole cut from a sapling,
or two long sticks lashed together (they often had
to carry or drag them a mile or two) these nests
could be gently tipped so that the eggs rolled out
in succession, to be caught in a coat held out, soft
side upward, by two other boys below. By a
skilful and well-timed movement of the coat from
left to right at the moment of their arrival, the
eggs could be landed separately, and undamaged.
Some nests, like that of the leatherhead (the
queer fellow with wrinkled parchment over his
bald head) built in over-hanging leaves where it
was dangerous to climb, could be lifted bodily
down with the same pole, provided a fork was left
at the top of it, or the tip was split apart.
Sometimes nests of the smaller birds, like
thrushes and honey-eaters, were built in saplings
or scrub-trees so slender that climbing was out of
the question. A sapling could be bent over till the
eggs, by gentle shaking, were made to drop one
at a time into a hat, into which something soft had
been put. And a good way to get a nest from the
tall scrub bushes was to lasso the top with a string,
to which a stone was tied, and haul it to the
ground. These nests were usually enclosed or
covered nests, or else were suspended in such a
way that their balance was maintained when the
tree bent over; so that the eggs rarely spilled.
More than once, having found the nest of a
small and rare bird built out of reach in a gully


or on a steep hillside, Podge lifted the eggs out
with the aid of a piece of wattle gum attached to a
long switch, the drooping point of which was
dipped into the nest. This could only be done in
the case of very small, light eggs, and as these
were very fragile, it was necessary to moisten them
in order to detach them without damage from
the gum, and the fur or feather lining that came
away with them.
Podge had one objection to this and similar
methods of removing eggs from the nest. Once
out, the eggs could not be put back; so in cases
where they were “hard-sat” and could not be
blown, they were of necessity destroyed, and thus
uselessly wasted.
Then there were many birds, particularly in
the scrub, which relied for protection on hiding
their nests rather than building them out of reach.
The robin, for instance, plastered a small nest
against the trunk of a stringy-bark, and covered it
with flakes of the tree’s own bark, so that only
careful observation could distinguish it from the
trunk itself.
The wagtail’s soft cow-hair nest down by the
river was so beautifully covered with cobwebs that
it was merely an enlargement of the silver-white
bough of the willow or ash on which it was built.
The sweet-voiced thrush’s nest was little more
than a tray of the brushy foliage surrounding it,
and so like it, and so thin, that it would easily be


passed by, but that the eggs could be counted
through it against the bright light above.
Some of the ground birds, and those nesting in
low bushes, used various ruses, such as pretending
to be sick or to have a broken wing, to decoy the
searcher away from their nests; but to the initiated
this was the surest guide to his objective. Birds
that built in banks or in hollows in trees usually
hid or disguised the entrances cleverly, and here
again a knowledge of the habits of the birds was
necessary to outwit them.
The reed-warbler, whose song —sweet almost
as the nightingale’s—betrayed its nesting-place in
the reed-beds of the less accessible parts of the
river, felt secure and safe out over deep water.
Tangled weeds forbade swimming to the nest
from the one side, and the water was too deep to
wade from the bank. Podge found, after tedious
and risky experiment, that by bending the reeds
over in armfuls, and flattening them as he pro-
gressed, he could lie on his stomach without
sinking, and snake himself to the nest and back,
carrying the precious eggs in his mouth.*
Some birds, like the plovers and sand-pipers,
merely laid their eggs on the ground, where they
so resembled the stones that they were hard to
detect; and the curlew and the frogmouth
The usual way to bring eggs to safety, especially when
climbing a nest, was to put them in your hat and pull it well
on your head; but small and precious ones, as in this case
were earned in the mouth. &e ’


disguised not their eggs, but themselves, by simu-
lating a dead stick, the first-named on the ground,
the latter on a tree. Bush cunning alone could
detect the slightly opened slit in the veiled yellow
eye which changed stick into bird, and betrayed
the nest near by. Thus the difficulty in some
cases was not to retrieve the eggs when found,
but to find them.


CHAPTER VIII
Podge’s love for the bush —Finds an ant-eater —His
curios and pets —The Hair-worm —The Koala—The
Noisy Curlew —Blue Fish —Joey.
Podge’s desire to be independent resulted not only
in his finding other means of getting eggs, but
also in the acquiring of an intimate knowledge of
the birds and other wild things of the bush,
besides developing a great love for them. As a
necessary supplement to his outings with the boys,
he went for long, quiet, bush tramps, alone,
playing truant from school as a rule, in order to
do so.
He loved these solitary outings. They were his
most cherished experiences. He was, it was clear,
more naturalist than hunter, and he spent many
and many a quiet hour observing and studying the
birds in their wild haunts. His egg-box, at first
—like that of any small boy—a mere jumble of
indifferent eggs of the commoner sorts, grew to
be a well-ordered collection, embracing almost


every known local species, carefully identified,
described and listed. He was, even at that age,
no mean authority on the birds of the district.
He made the acquaintance of the old German
who looked after the town museum —a genial
man and friend to all the boys. With specimens
and information Podge helped him in the arrange-
ment of his egg collection, in return for which he
received much kindly assistance in other directions.
It was but natural that on these solitary
meanderings Podge should make many discoveries.
Some of these he never revealed, or even spoke
of j they were his secrets. But from time to time
he brought home specimens of the animal kingdom
that were not only interesting, but often most
novel and curious.
Once, out in the hills, he came on a funny little
creature which he recognized at once as a porcu-
pine, or more correctly, echidna. When it saw
him, it first bristled up its spines, and then beat a
hasty retreat, or rather descent, into the earth.
Before it had quite disappeared from view, Podge
had found a stick, and soon had it prised out on
its back. With it rolled in his coat he made back
oyer the five long miles, and triumphantly landed
his treasure safely home.
He housed it in a box in the back-yard and fed
it —or tried to feed it —on bread and milk. But it
would neither eat nor stay at home. It could
burrow any fence with ease. In ordinary ground


it could sink itself out of sight in three minutes,
the soil shifted from underneath by its busy feet
flowing curiously over its back, almost like water.
Whenever he missed it, Podge made for the
nearest ant-bed on the railway embankment.
There would be Porky, having a most delightful
time munching the ants its gluey tongue drew into
its mouth from the mass that swarmed over its
little spike-protected body. And while it munched,
the sickening odour of crushed ants filled the air.
All the boys came to see the porcupine. They
loved to see it bury itself, or roll itself up in a
spiky ball; or to turn it over on its back and see
the poor little creature draw in its feet and beak,
and close its eyes, trying to shrink out of sight.
It was a puzzle to dogs, and when they grew too
inquisitive Podge, just for fun, would urge them
to investigate it. They only needed sooling on to
make an attack; but they would never make a
second. Podge was very grieved when Porky
strayed into a garden several doors down the
street, and the owner, thinking, no doubt, it was
some dangerous animal, killed it with his spade.
A real curiosity, and a source of wonderment
to all, was Podge’s live horsehair. He found it
one hot day while lying on his stomach drinking
from a waterhole. In fact, he almost swallowed
it in one of his thirsty gulps. When he discovered
that the horsehair was alive, and was actually
swimming, he captured it, examined it in amaze-


ment, then wrapping it in a wet handkerchief,
ran all the way home.
He corked it up in a tube of water and carried
it about for some weeks, trying vainly to identify
it. He showed it to his friend at the museum and
to every chemist and school-teacher he knew. But
no, it was a mystery j no one had ever seen any-
thing like it.
As a final thrill Podge would take the beastie
out of the tube and dry it. Thus it would remain
for hours, like a dried thread, with no sign of life
about it. On replacing it in the water it would
come to life and resume swimming in a few
seconds. Podge lost the tube one day, and when
it was found a week later it was broken, and the
“hair-worm,” for that is what it proved to be,
was not only dry, but broken into small pieces.
One rainy day, roaming near the Cookbundoon
Hills, Podge located a native bear in a sapling.
were plenty of these bears in that locality,
but this one he thought was a young one, because
it was in a sapling. He begged a sack from a hut
near by, and with a forked stick poked the bear
into it. He, too, was housed in a wire-fronted
box; but he turned out to be a veteran and made
his escape from the box. When Podge tried to
recapture him, the bear—likely enough in fear
rather than any desire to hurt—gripped him with
his long claws and hung on to him, meanwhile
seizing his thumb in his mouth. He held on to the


thumb tenaciously, gnawing steadily at it, till
Podge’s screams brought the help of neighbours,
who killed the poor koala.
Podge’s thumb was in ribbons, and the gumleaf-
tainted teeth caused it to fester, so that it was bad
for a long time. When his father came home and
heard about it, he gave Podge a good dressing
down for his cruelty to the “poor dumb animal.”
But he spoke not a word about the wounded
thumb, which, by its deformity, promised to
remind Podge ever after that koalas can bite more
than gum-leaves.
From out on the plains Podge brought home a
curlew. It had run behind a log and disappeared.
There were only pieces of dead wood to be seen.
Podge put his foot on an apparently dead stick and
it proved to be a curlew.
That was the day big Bill Taylor chased him.
Ginger Badcock and Joe Payne were with Podge
that day, and while they were eating their lunch
by a fallen tree, Ginger set fire to the dry grass
that had blown up against it. In no time the whole
tree was alight, and it must have been seen for
miles over the plains.
They knew it was a terrible thing to do—to
light a fire —for it might have burnt all the grass
in the sheep paddocks j so they ran for their lives.
Looking back, they saw a man on horseback coming
in the distance —riding very fast. They guessed
it was Bill Taylor, who owned the land. He was


a terror, Bill was. They ran all the harder then,
and lost sight of him for a while. Getting through
several fences, they thought they were safe as
Bill would have to ride round.
But Bill must have seen that too, and had
jumped the fences, for after they had run about
two miles across country and were fit to drop, he
suddenly came galloping over a knoll and was
right on top of them. All three scattered as he
threw himself off his horse, cursing wildly. He
made for Joe, who was the biggest, and belted
him with the handle of his stockwhip. Then the
other two came back, terrified, and they all gave
him their names and addresses (all wrong ones)
which he wrote down. Then he said they would
get summonses, and let them go with a boot each.
For luck, he said.
Their running had brought them nearly back
to town, and their day was spoilt, in addition to
which they were hot and tired and all upset. But
Ginger still had the young hare he had caught
alive —though it was nearly dead from strangling
—and Podge had hung on to his curlew. It was
so infested with small lice that Podge was
smothered with them by the time he got home,
and. had to undergo solitary confinement and
special treatment in the wash-house while his
clothes were being fumigated.
The curlew was given the garden to roam in.
He was only active at night or when it rained. At


such times he would unfold his long legs and run
round and round the garden, picking up worms
and things, emitting at intervals his weird, ear-
piercing cry. That was the part Podge liked best.
It was real bush. But the neighbours liked it least.
One morning he found the curlew half buried in
the cabbage bed, with a brick, which had been
dropped over the garden fence, on top of him.
These and many other things Podge brought
home from the bush, including birds of many
kinds, some of which would not live because they
would only eat insects ; some because they could
not stand captivity.
One little parrot he had was his favourite pet
of all time. “Joey” was a common but very pretty
little rosella. Podge found him out Boxer’s Creek
way one day, not in a nest, but screeching on the
ground apparently in a fit. When he picked him
up the bird fought fiercely, and fastened his little
hooked bill into his finger. Podge ran to a water-
hole and plunged him in. That released his finger
and cured the bird. He was a sorry-looking, half-
drowned parrot when Podge put him in his pocket.
“Now,” he said when he got home, “you’re
too old to learn to talk, but I can’t let you go free
to starve 5 so if you’ll try and be good, I’ll keep
you.”
Joey would not be good. Not for a long time.
He bit Podge’s hands whenever he got the chance.
But Podge was patient. He did everything he


possibly could to make Joey happy. He brought
him grass seeds and thistle heads —even delicious
red prickly pears and oak nuts from the bush.
And at night, when Joey was crouched on his perch
with his head tucked under his wing trying to
sleep, he would sit beside him and whistle and
talk to him, the same things over and over again,
till his lips were tired.
No response came from Joey, except that now
and again he would lift his head from under his
wing, blink his eyes (they shut so curiously—
from the bottom upward!) and stretch his hooky
beak open in a way that seemed to say plainly,
“Do let me alone.”
At last persistence won. First came a soft and
indistinct “Poor Joey.” Then, once started, he
learned quickly, till he could whistle “The Girl I
Left Behind Me” from beginning to end, quite as
well as Podge. Better, perhaps. And besides
whistling he could talk: say lots of things in a little
raspy voice like a very old man’s.
Then they were friends. Podge loved to stand
his cage in the grass when it was sunny and lie
beside it, watching Joey’s clever little bill select
choice morsels from the green forest around him
and roll them round with the help of his funny
grub of a tongue to strip them and take out the
kernel. All the while Joey would keep up a run-
ning chatter about the things he liked the best to
eat and about his own beauty.


“Joey’s a Pretty Boy,” he would confide
huskily through a mouthful of food; “Kiss Joey”
(kiss, kiss, kiss) j “Joey likes thistles j give Joey a
bath; more wheat —more wheat!” and then burst
into whistling.
Joey liked to be lifted up from the ground
before evening and hung under the veranda. If
Podge chanced to forget him for ever so short a
while, and darkness began to fall, the fear of his
old-time enemies of the bush came upon him. He
would crouch with his wings spread, shivering, and
in a tremulous voice would plead piteously “Up
top Joe, up top!” growing more and more agitated
till he was frantic with fear. Then Podge would
appear and call his name —and all would be well.
. When October came (October is the month the
young parrots appear) Joey would grow very
friendly and affectionate. The old parent instinct
would come to him, and he would prepare little
blobs of well-chewed grain with which to feed
Podge through the wires. If Podge yielded to
his coaxing to come close and be kissed, Joey
planted the food right in his mouth; but if he
were more guarded, it was left on the wire for
him. Then Joey was satisfied that his brood had
been fed. And every October, for as long as he
lived, Joey fed Podge.*
But sad days came when Joey began to fail.
His bright feathers grew shabby, he would not eat
was a c ° ck bird With some birds, cock and hen feed
the young. Joey belonged to one of these species.


his food, and he flew screeching at his mate when-
ever he came near. Nothing Podge could do or
say would soothe him. In vain he brought him
dainty tit-bits and shifted his cage to new positions
among the garden beds. One day he opened the
door of the cage.
“There, little friend,” he said, “you can go if
you like. You are not happy here. You can have
anything I can give you; but if that is not enough,
well, go!”
Each day for a week, Joey walked out, strolled
around the garden, and walked back into his cage.
Then one day he didn’t return. Podge was sad.
A week later, when he and the Noble boys were
hunting for a ball at the bottom of the garden,
he found, behind the hedge, a bright blue, black
and green wing, two claws and a funny little
hooked beak, and a patch of small, bright red
feathers. Poor Joey!
In addition to birds, Podge kept fish. His
father had made an aquarium of half a hogs-
head, mounted on a stand in the garden, and had
provided it with many small round windows. It
had a rockery and aquatic plants, and a secret
pipe supplied a steady change of water. In this
aquarium were kept the fish Podge caught in the
pools after floods, and some gold ones he caught
at times in the deep reaches of the river by
stealthily creeping on the fish with a long-handled
net as they sunned themselves at the surface on


hot days—small shoals of them, with just a gold
one here and there among the common black ones.
One day while wagging it from school, Podge
wandered in solitary bliss among the old brick-
pits, when, coming quietly on a waterhole that had
almost dried up under the summer sun, he was
amazed to see, basking at the top of the yellow
water, a dozen most vividly coloured fish; some
red-gold, some black and red, some red and white;
but most wonderful of all, some sky-blue ones.
Podge had never seen such unusually-coloured
fish. It was a great and marvellous find. Keeping
it secret, he improvised a net from a chaff bag
and a hoop, and the following Saturday, before
anyone else became aware of it, he went down and
dredged the fast disappearing water.
The aquarium soon became the admiration of
the neighbourhood and for a whole year was the
source of great interest. There was always some-
one popping in to see the marvellous fish, and
they grew so used to people looking at them that
at the sound of a voice they would come and rub
their noses inquisitively at the little round win-
dows. Then one by one, mysteriously, the fish
began to disappear. No one could account for this.
Then the entire family kept guard. One day
when ,t was too late, Podge caught Nigger, their
old black cat, in the act of eating one of the
precious few remaining fish, which it was plain
he had raked out with his paw.


CHAPTER IX
A way out —Indian signals—Stuffing birds —Making
gun-powder—A Wild West Show —Chief Sitting
Bull.
In his growing knowledge of nature lore and in
his accumulation of treasures, Podge was aware of
an inharmonious note. Whether he wandered
alone in the bush among his beloved birds, or went
out with the gang on Saturdays for a rough and
tumble ramble over hill and plain, visiting the
nests that each boy knew, calling at the rifle range
to find brass cartridge cases to make cannons and
at the slaughter-yard to pick out a pair of pretty
bullock horns to scrape and polish 5 robbing young
’uns from magpies’ nests and being pursued by the
old birds j tramping miles over treeless plains to
muddy waterholes or weedy dribble to slake a
four-hour thirst; finally arriving home tired and
hungry with nothing to show but a few eggs in a
mustard tin or a half-dead bird or two —there
was always at home-coming the fear that his
father would be displeased.


His father was the brake on his pleasure.
Through the week Podge and his brothers could
stack up the wood as neatly as possible, could clean
up the yard the best they knew; they could pick up
the rose prunings and have everything spick and
span before Saturday came; but if, on that day,
their father saw them leaving, without fail he
would call them back and find them another job.
“Now my lads, now my lads, let’s have you,”
he would say, “here Tom, here Paul, here
William j don’t you think you could find some-
thing to do about the place instead of racing
round the country every spare minute?”
With their bright hopes for an enjoyable day
dashed to the ground, the boys would return in
dejected submission. And if he didn’t see them
leaving they knew well enough that there was a
growl in store for them when they got home.
The call of the outdoors was irresistible, how-
ever, and would not be denied. Podge and his
mates set about solving the problem. It was
difficult. As sure as they called for Podge, Mr
Lindsay was certain to suspect something was
afoot. At last it dawned on the boys that what
was needed was some means of calling without
being seen. And this is how they managed it.
Said Ginger: “I read in a story how the Red
Indians used to make a noise like a wild bird or
animal to signal one another, so the white men


wouldn’t know. Let’s make up signals like that.”
All agreed it was a good idea.
“I know,” said Podge, “you fellers remember
how my Joey used to whistle in that funny way
—sort of whistle-talk that said something, though
it was only just whistling? Well, ’spose we do
that.” So they invented a code of “speaking
whistles,” known only to themselves.
Thereafter, on Saturday mornings when his
father was at home, Podge would be as busy as
could be, innocent of any thought or desire to go
out, when from somewhere in the distance would
come a whistle.
It meant nothing to anyone else, but to him it
said clearly:
“Podgy Lind-say!”
Just as innocently he would whistle, “Where
to?”
“Over the Rocks,” would come back.
Then a silent exit by way of the garden fence, a
swift departure by devious ways; and by the time
his father had missed him and was calling “Now
Paul, my lad,” Podge had joined the others, and
the party was well on its way to the bush.
But if there was any soft spot at all in Mr
Lindsay’s heart, it was for Podge. Though some-
thing—pride perhaps —would not let him show
it, he did on occasion perform such acts as indicated
clearly that underneath his sternness there was a
softness.


He bought Podge a book on taxidermy, for
example, and sundry poisons and wires and
assorted glass eyes prescribed therein for stuffing
birds ; and built him a weather-board room in the
back-yard, where he could skin and mount his
specimens and display them on the shelves. Here
Podge brought all manner of things, in varying
stages of deadness, to mess about with, quite
regardless of the discomfiture of patient Big
Sister and the disparaging remarks of his brothers.
It was a wonderful thing for his father to have
done, and Podge did appreciate it; even though,
only a week later, he received a flogging with a
quince-rod for notching his father’s beloved
English oak tree with a new tomahawk. Before
his brothers and a houseful of visitors too, and of
all days—Sunday afternoon. To be fair to Mr
Lindsay, however, it must be told that Paul did
not own up truthfully like George Washington.
Podge had now arrived at an age when school
was regarded more seriously. He was now among
the older boys of the school, and came more or
less under the direct tutelage of old Jacob, the
headmaster.
“Old Jacob” he always was to the boys; “Old
Jacob” he had been to the boys before them. It
seemed he never could be anything else. No
other name would fit him. Not that he was not
respected. On the contrary, although he was at
times severe, and wielded the cane with a heavy
G


hand, he held the love and esteem of all his pupils,
whether past or present, and of their parents. In
their lives he had become more than a person,
more than their teacher. He was an institution —
an established, honoured and loved institution.
It was old Jacob’s custom to take the upper class
of boys to the girls’ school on certain days, to join
with the girls in singing and other exercises. Or,
on Friday mornings, to bear for one long, painful
hour the moral lecture of the irascible old parson
who came to give them religious instruction. This
class, for some reason or other, old Jacob did not
attend in person. Perhaps he was of a different
faith. Nobody knew rightlyj but the boys all
envied him.
These joint meetings (not the Friday morning
ones) were made the occasion for a good deal of
horseplay on the part of the boys. It was a
favourite game to fix a strand of elastic to a
hairpin and shoot bent pins at one another or at
the girls in front. Or the entertainment could be
varied by bending a pin in the form of a triangle
and placing it, point upward, while the occupant
was standing up to speak his part. Of course, one
took care to put it on a seat some distance away,
so as to avoid all the blame when the wounded
one yelled.
Then there was always a goodly supply of
quinces in Podge’s vicinity. “Googie” saw to that
—long Googie Darker j his people owned an


orchard —and what the boys couldn’t eat they
threw at the girls. An oversized bite bounced off
Spencer’s head one day, and, to the horror of
all, landed out on the floor at old Jacob’s feet.
Podge knew where it came from, for he was sitting
next to Spencer. Bruizer threw it; he saw him
do it. But either the line of direction or his own
high colour fastened suspicion on Podge, and he
was called out and given a thrashing. So was
Peter Rose, for saying Podge didn’t do it. And
before all the girls.
The girls seemed to be rather sorry; they were
real good chums, those girls. Although the boys
played tricks on them and were somewhat rude to
them at times, they were really fond of them,
and would do anything for them.
Now that they were under the headmaster,
Podge and his mates paid more attention to what
they learned at school. They even applied their
learning in a practical manner. For example, they
were once given a lesson on gun-powder. The
subject was popular, and the method of manufac-
ture was so well explained to them that they
conceived the idea of making some gun-powder,
themselves.
Down to the flat by the river they went, one
Saturday—Ben Noble, Winker, Wee Davie, Duck
and Podge —and with charcoal from a burnt
willow stump, saltpetre and sulphur from home,
they succeeded in making gun-powder —gun-


powder that would really “go off j” even though
it took a long time to do it and made a great deal
of fizz and smoke. They incidentally succeeded
in burning all the hair from their brows and
forelocks.
From gun-powder, it was only natural the
boys’ thoughts should stray to guns. Its very
name, and the delicious smell of the smoke when
it went off, suggested shooting, carrying the
imagination in quick jumps away to bushrangers,
soldiers and Indians. Now, if only they had guns!
They had the powder —but no guns. As a substi-
tute they made the best of brass cartridge cases,
fastened to pieces of wood with bent nails. They
threw in and bought a one-and-tuppenny flask of
powder to help out their own. Theirs was just a
bit slow of action, but they kept that to themselves.
They rammed the cannons tight with powder and
slugs and a good wad of paper, and practised
shooting at trees, or across the water to see how far
they would carry.
Out of this grew Ben’s idea of a Wild West
Show. He it was who thought of it first, the
others agreeing that it was a good thing, though
Winker did think a war would be better. On Ben
pointing out that there would be Indians and
plenty of fighting, Winker w r as satisfied. Among
the briars down by the crossing on the way to
Rocky was chosen as the quietest place, and they
went at once to inspect the site. They made their


plans, and fixed the date for one Saturday a week
ahead. Ben was to be ringmaster, since it was his
idea.
The two Nobles got chaff-bags from their
father’s produce store, to screen in an enclosure,
so no one could see the show without paying.
Turkey feathers were gathered from near and far
to adorn the Indians. Half of them were Indians.
Old felt hats with red handkerchiefs round their
necks turned the others into cowboys. It proved
a real good show, every boy in the neighbourhood
—and more than a few girls—coming and paying
threepence to see it.
They had secured a couple of old rifles—
Winker brought one and Wee Davie one —but
they couldn’t get the powder to work well in them.
They blew up the prairie schooner, though—with
half a pound of powder. It made a great scene,
with plenty of smoke and smell. Then the Indians
yelled and whooped and scalped everybody,
hanging the scalps to their belts; and everything
was going along fine until Wee Davie’s father,
who could see it all from his home up on the
point, thought someone would be killed, and came
down and stopped it.
The chief attraction of the show was Nipper,
Podge’s next elder brother, who took the part of
Sitting Bull. Nipper was the bad boy of the
Lindsay family. He wagged it constantly, and to
save hidings kept away from home for long spells,


so that even his brothers saw very little o£ him.
Nipper was a good runner, a good swimmer and a
good fighter, and he knew so many things that
they didn’t know that the boys thought it a great
honour to have him. Nipper himself thought so
too. He laid down certain conditions before he
would consent to join in, and one was that they
should all keep a sharp look out to see that he was
not caught. As for Podge, Nipper threatened to
job him if he mentioned his name at home.
Nipper made a splendid Indian chief. He was
Sitting Bull to a T, and what all admired most
was his wonderful colour. No one knew how he
did it —only Podge. He knew. Knew that
Nipper had sneaked home the night before and
raided the paint shelf in his father’s little work-
shop. And the tin that was missing was “Burnt
Sienna in Oil; Permanent Stainer.” Yes, Podge
knew, if the others didn’t; and when he saw his
brother subsequently—caught glimpses of him
down by the river or in someone else’s garden
where he was being harboured —Podge knew why
Nipper still had the lovely Indian-red skin of
Sitting Bull, had it for fully six weeks after.
Poor Nipper! He came to a sad end, shortly
after. Big Sergeant McHarg pounced on him
and took him away to the lock-up. Podge had
felt a little resentful towards Nipper because of
the way he had humiliated him before all the
others at the circus, but now he forgot all that.


He and young Charlie were much distressed, and
pleaded with their father to get him back. Mr
Lindsay did relent, but it was too late. He had
set things going too well, and Nipper had to serve
a term on board the Vernon , a training-ship for
boys, stationed at Sydney.


CHAPTER X
Forbidden ground—Bruizer and Podge in trouble—
Down the Reach —Podge and his “catta”—Shooting
Mopokes—Hunting Snakes.
It was Old Jacob’s custom to take the boys, or a
selected body of them, to the river once every
week, to teach all who could not already swim, to
do so. Occasionally, he would put on old clothes,
and at the most unexpected moment, as they were
trailing along the bank, would drop into the water
to give them an opportunity of making a practical
rescue.
It was to the Wollondilly, in the Police
Paddocks below the jail, Old Jacob took them.
Swimming or trespassing of any sort down there
was strictly forbidden, and dire penalties were
prescribed on notice boards along the fence. It
was a place the boys knew little about, though they
had all yearned to know more. So they relished
the opportunity of going with the schoolmaster,
whose name and favourable reputation gave him
free access everywhere.


There was one boy who never went swimming.
That boy was Bruizer. Always when this outing
was mentioned, he had some excuse. Podge
wondered why, for he would very much have
liked him to come. Besides, Bruizer lived down
that way, and was familiar with the river and all
the forbidden parts of it. It turned out that his
father looked after that particular property. It
was a wonderful spot, with beautiful swimming
holes fringed with big willow-trees to dive from,
as well as being a great place for birds and nests.
Podge wanted to go there, badly—not merely to
swim, but to explore quietly and to bird-nest.
Finally he persuaded Bruizer to take him.
They found numerous nests, took a dip or two
all by themselves, and had a splendid time. Then,
just as they were coming up the river-bank, they
heard someone calling. Bruizer stopped, with his
hand to his ear. Then he said quickly:
“Run, Podge, run for all you’re worth. Get
out of sight—across the river—under the briars.
Goon! Get! It’s the governor. I’m in for it!”
Then he calmly walked forward up the slope.
Podge got without delay, for coming down the
hill, almost on them, was a man on horseback. It
was Bruizer’s father. He was very angry, and
was brandishing a vicious-looking stockwhip.
From the thick cover across the river into which
he had plunged, Podge could hear his fearsome


voice calling after Jack, which was Bruizer’s
proper name.
“Jike, Jike,” he bellowed, “Hi, you, Ji-i-ike!
Ha, there you are. What the Didn’t I tell
you Why didn’t you Who’ve you got
with you, eh?”
And even as the stockwhip began to crack and
swish, Bruizer nobly lied:
“No one!”
The governor flogged poor Bruizer as he would
a bullock.
For just a second or two Podge watched in
horror. Then, sorry —very sorry —for Bruizer,
but glad that the old man could not be in two
places at once, he scurried along the riverside,
through the willows and briars, and never stopped
for breath until he had put half a mile and a
barbed-wire fence between him and the governor.
That was the last visit he ever paid to the Police
Paddocks.
Farther down the river, below where the
Mulwarree joins the Wollondilly, was a long,
broad stretch called the Reach. It was then rarely
visited, and indeed the banks were so thickly
grown with willows—both weeping and basket
willows —and briars, that it was difficult to get
along there. Besides, it was dangerous, for the
growth often quite obscured the steep and
treacherous banks. But here Podge discovered a
veritable paradise, with birds galore, some of them


very rare; and quietly exploring, he got many
fine specimens—both birds and eggs.
Down there, at times, he would take a select
companion or two to share his secrets, and, inci-
dentally, to see his prowess with the catapult; for
of all the boys Podge was the best shot with the
“catta” or “Shanghai.”
A slender, carefully-selected hawthorn or
hickory fork, carrying two bands of the strongest
red rubber strip he could buy, and fitted with a
soft leather pouch for slug or stone —that was his
weapon. It was primitive enough, but the skill
that could be developed with it was marvellous. A
brief, silent manoeuvre for position, a steady
stretch of the bands, a twang —and nine times out
of ten, a bird fell.
It was Duck and Podge’s brother Charlie who
usually went with him on these rare occasions.
They were novices. Both knew little about birds
or eggs, so there was no danger in trusting them
with a share in his discoveries. At the same time
they appreciated the privilege of being taken
along.
“See that dead branch?” Podge would whisper,
stopping suddenly and pointing cautiously up a
tree.
“Yes,” from both, beneath their breath.
“Then watch it!”
A stretch of the elastic bands, a careful aim—
ping—a clip on the tip of the dead branch; then,


a great yellow frogmouth opened to emit a com-
bined squawk and gurgle, and the branch, with
much flapping of wings, would fall to their feet —
a dead mopoke.*
Duck could never quite understand how Podge
could see a bird in a dead stick. He failed to see
the gleam of the yellow eye-slit. As for young
Charlie, he would never say a word —merely look
on in puzzled wonderment and adoration.
Podge used the catapult to get most of his
specimens for skinning j for now he stuffed birds
as well as collected eggs. He could kill very large
birds with small lead slugs, and from some
distance. More than once he killed the Christmas
turkey in this way. It saved the bother of chasing
and catching the bird, besides being much nicer
and quicker than beheading it with an axe.
If a bird was wanted for mounting, however,
care had to be taken to hit it where no damage
would be done to the specimen. For small birds
Podge used very fine shot, or even sand,
moistened 5 a practice he continued later on when
he bought a muzzle-loading gun.
Another favourite spot along the river was on
the other side from the Reach, in the Kenmore
paddocks. This became Podge’s Sunday afternoon
haunt. In winter, when cold westerlies drove the
birds to the more sheltered timber of the river
* Frogmouth is the proper name for the bird usually called
Mopoke. It is the Boobook owl which makes “more pork” call.


valley, Bruizer, Googie Darker and Podge would
hunt jackasses in the waterside trees. In one
afternoon they would kill with their catapults as
many as a dozen of these most confiding and
lovable of all bush birds. They were at that
season in their best feather, and the boys took as
trophies their pretty bronze-blue mottled wings.
In summer they hunted snakes instead of
kookaburras, over the same ground. Strange to
say, the kookaburras were hunting snakes too.
They were good snake hunters, and for that
reason, if for no other, they deserved kindness and
consideration rather than slaughter. No one knew
that better than Podge. More than once he had
watched a pair of kookas, to the accompaniment
of their own demoniacal laughter, fly up with a
wriggling snake in their beaks to drop it from a
great height on to an open patch of ground; this
they repeated, till stunned into insensibility, it
would be carried unresisting to a high branch near
by and dispatched.
Bruizer used to argue that the birds ate the
snakes. He knew positively that they did. Podge
was just as positive that they did not, for when-
ever he had seen a snake thus killed, it had always
—after a severe pecking and buffeting—been left
behind. And, what was more, he reckoned a
kookaburra couldn’t eat a snake if it tried. Big
as its mouth was, it couldn’t swallow it whole;


and to break a snake in sections seemed a job too
tough even for the strong bill of a kookaburra.
They used to leave the birds alone on these hot
Sunday afternoons, and, each armed with a tough,
half-green stick, would engage in the somewhat
risky, but very exciting sport of finding snakes
and killing them. In the hot, moist vicinity of
the river, amongst briars and drift, there were
plenty of them. They were mostly brown snakes,
of the lead-coloured variety, and were known to
be among the venomous species. A snake once
seen —and they poked into every likely corner for
them —it was a point of honour, or duty, with the
boys to kill it if possible; yet Podge frankly
admitted that he never in his life attacked a snake
without feeling very, very frightened. Although
they did not say so, the others probably felt the
same way about it.


CHAPTER XI
A trip to the caves —Camp life —Driving wallabies —
Lyre birds and nests —Lost in the bush —In a hollow
log—Koalas and young—Podge’s babies —Wallaby
soup and damper.
When Podge was twelve years old, a party of
men, mostly relatives of his, arranged a shooting
trip to the Wombeyan Caves. The object of
the venture was to shoot for wallaby skins, which
would be sold on their return.
Podge was invited to go with them. He, of
course, was not expected to partake of the profits,
nor did he desire to do so. The privilege of being
invited was enough for him. As the trip was to
occupy three weeks, he not only had to get his
father’s consent, but leave from school as well.
In both cases, permission was granted.
The caves were forty miles away, in wild
mountainous country, with no fresh food avail-
able save what the party shot. With two drays,
loaded up with tents, ammunition and a good
supply of corned beef and flour, they set out.


It took two days of continuous travelling even
by night to reach their destination. The road,
especially the last stages of it, was a mere track,
and in some parts dangerous. To negotiate one
place, down the side of a precipitous gorge, stout
poles had to be cut from bush trees, then lashed to
the drays, and used as brake levers on the wheels.
That night —it was full moon —the drays being
sent ahead in charge of one man, the rest of the
party cut through the bush, shooting possums.
There were plenty about, all in good fur. The
men walked in open order, scanning the trees
against the bright moon. Once “mooned” the
possums were easy to shoot, though in that light
aim had to give way somewhat to judgment.
Podge enjoyed that moonlight tramp very
much. It was an adventure. With the lonely
bush all round, the hard frost shining white on the
ground, his ears and fingers atingle, and no sound
to be heard —apart from occasional shots —and the
clockety-clock of the dray wheels on the road half
a mile away, there was something novel and
romantic about it that he would long remember.
Indeed, his whole stay at the Caves was to prove
a landmark in his life. It was his first taste of
camp life. Sleeping in a tent on a bunk made with
saplings covered with fragrant gum-leaves, on
which his blankets were spread, was to him a novel
and delightful experience. To listen to the
strange, weird noises of the bush as he went to


sleep, and to waken to the call of the birds ; then
to boil the billy and eat breakfast around a camp-
fire sending out the lovely odour of gum-leaf
smoke! It was great!
The bush was mostly virgin. There was a small
accommodation house at the caves for the few
visitors who came along, but with that exception,
there was no house for many miles. The wallabies
had the country to themselves. And they were
there in thousands, all kinds of them, from the
big grey-white kangaroos and black wallaroos to
the small brown and grey rock-wallabies, more
like overgrown squirrels than anything, which
swarmed the honeycombed limestone bluffs in
droves. The more one shot of these lively little
chaps the more ammunition one wasted. They
had to be shot dead to collect them. The wounded
ones, no matter how badly wounded, always
managed to get away in the hollows and crevices
of the rocks. No matter how quickly one reached
the spot, they were gone; easily nine out of ten
escaped.
The larger marsupials had to be driven in the
usual way, namely: half the party, being told off
as shooters, would station themselves at intervals
up a scrubby hillside, where they took cover and
quietly waited. The remainder would make a
detour along the top of the ridge for half a mile,
then descend, spacing themselves at intervals
down the hillside as the shooters had done. At a


signal from the leader, these men would make
slowly along the side of the hill, beating the in-
tervening bush and shouting as they came.
The game, comprising mostly brush, scrub and
swamp wallabies, would fly before the oncoming
drivers, to be met and shot by the hidden shooters,
and the killing continued until the drivers came
within range of the guns. Shooting had to stop
then, and some game of necessity was spared.
The temptation offered by close shots, however,
led at times to indiscretion; more than one driver
received a warm tickling, which meant having a
pellet or two picked from his ribs with a
pocket-knife.
The wallabies often came so thick that it was
impossible to load fast enough, and some got by.
Podge had only his old muzzle-loader, which
gave him two shots only, for by the time he could
ram two more charges in, the drive was practically
over. The others had breech-loaders, and were
all excellent shots, so that very few wallabies
got past them.
The does, at that season, were mostly carrying
young in their pouches. The winter-time had
been chosen for the trip because the skins carried
best fur then; and winter is the breeding season
not only for wallabies, but for all the marsupials.
These young ones, or “joeys,” proved a big
handicap for the mothers, particularly those that


were well grown. When the firing-line was
reached, the law of self-preservation asserted
itself, and Joey was thrown out, to scamper away
in the scrub as best he could. As far as possible,
the men avoided shooting the does. If one was
shot occasionally it was by accident.
After each drive, the carcasses were collected,
and all took a hand in the skinning. Each member
of the party had to carry his share of the pelts,
which, when fresh, were no light load in rough
country. On the return to camp in the evening,
the skins were pegged out on tree-trunks,* and
later, when dry, were piled flat in a spare tent.
During these drives it was not unusual to see
lyre birds —or pheasants, as they were more often
called —hustling along with the wallabies after
being shifted from their thick cover in the fern
beds. They could be seen gliding in and out
among the undergrowth, the males with their
erstwhile erect harp-shaped tails trailing behind
themj but never once did they come past the
shooters. Always they crossed the dip before
coming within range of the guns, and vanished
from view up the next hillside. But they would
have been quite safe even if they had come on,
for ammunition was heavy to carry, and too
precious to waste on them —beautiful though they
were.
* Marsupial skins are, of course, tapered, and when pegging
out the green pelt, the narrow forepart is stretched so that the
dry akin will cut as big a square as possible.


Podge made a rare discovery during his stay,
in the shape of two of these birds’ nests. In each
case the nest was in an unfrequented, tree-
shadowed gully and was built on a pile of sticks
two feet high. The top of the nest was roofed
over, leaving only a small entrance, on the rim of
which the hen bird rested her head as she kept
her silent, untiring watch. In each case, too, the
bird stayed motionless on the nest without even
blinking an eye, until Podge actually reached out
to touch her. Then with a shrill, frightened cry
she leapt out, fairly in his face, and scurried away
out of sight in the undergrowth.
There was only one egg in each nest —one dark
brown mottled, one light grey with splotches of
buff. The remarkable thing about it was to Podge
that they were both hard sat. Hard sat in the
middle of winter! Here were rare specimens,
and Podge went to great pains to save them.
Blowing was out of the question, but little brown
ants helped him with one, while he emptied the
other by cutting it carefully on the under side
and removing the chick in pieces.
Lyre birds are wonderful mimics. They can
imitate any bird note, and for that matter almost
any other sound. Podge at first was startled to
hear familiar farm-yard sounds coming from the
bush at times —the crowing of cocks, the chuckle
of hens, the gobble of turkeys, the clinking of a


chain —when he well knew there was no farm
within ten miles!
There were plenty of native bears, too. Podge
frequently counted two and even three in one
large tree. Many of them had young ones. The
mother carries the young one on her back while
she is climbing and feeding on the gum-leaves —
that is, when it is old enough to leave the pouch;
it stays there for some months —for they, too,
are marsupials. When mating, or when they have
young ones, these quaint little creatures cry at
night like human babies. Often Podge would lie
in his bunk listening to their uncanny noises and
wondering what it was all about.
They did not shoot the bears, for though they
offered a very easy target, they took a lot of
killing. The thick fur of the back stops the shot
before it reaches a vital spot —before it reaches
the skin, very often. Podge was glad that the
bears were passed over; not because of the saving
in powder, but because they were so comical and
pretty. Besides, they were so defenceless —they
hadn’t a chance.
There was another party camped a mile or two
away, five men, who had been there for six weeks.
They were shooting with rifles, and unlike Podge’s
party, did not drive the game, but took sitting
shots, at any distance and at any animal, including
bears. At the time Podge and his friends saw


them they had thirty-five hundred skins, of all
kinds—kangaroo, all sorts of wallaby, bear, and a
few wombat. Thirty-five hundred skins in six
weeks!
Out in that cold mountain air—and it was
cold—appetites were ravenous, and the food ran
out early; so that the party had to live largely on
wallaby flesh. This was novel at first, at any rate
to Podge, but the novelty soon wore off. Wallaby
is very tough and insipid as a rule, but by selecting
only hind quarters from young does and cooking
them nicely in a camp oven (a stout cast iron
covered pot which was placed in the fire and
covered with hot coals) it was made rather
tasty. The damper was baked in the same camp
oven. Supplementing these was a perpetual
supply of wallaby-tail soup. This is really
good soup, of fine wild flavour, and so
rich that it turns to a stiff jelly when cold.
But all the same it became very tiresome to dip
into the same old stock-pot every day. They shot
an occasional hare (there were not many in that
heavy country) and a few of the big blue wonga
pigeons, and that broke the monotony a little.
Podge caught two young wallaby joeys, whose
mothers had thrown them away during the drives,
and took them to camp, intending to bring them
home with him. They were swamp wallabies, a
very handsome variety, black-backed and yellow-
bellied, with a pretty face like a sharp-nosed black


and tan terrier. They would make nice pets for
the garden at home and be quite a novelty.
There was no milk, of course, so Podge gave
them rice-water sweetened, fed from a bottle with
a piece of flannel tied on for them to suck. They
thrived on this unusual diet, and became so used to
their foster-mother that they would poke their
little heads up from their box beside the bunk at
intervals during the night and wake him with their
peculiar little call —“Psst, psst!” Podge would
light the candle, warm their half-frozen bottle
over the flame, give them each a drink, and off to
sleep they would go, snuggled up in their possum
skin nest.
Frank, the leader, whose tent Podge shared,
found on retiring one night that the little things
had disarranged the bed and camped in the
blankets. He at once ordered Podge to get rid of
them. Podge pleaded hard for his pets. He had
grown so attached to them, and it would only be
a day or two now. But it was no use; they had to
go. When, next morning, he took them away and
set them down in their natural element among
the bracken, they would not stay, but actually
followed him back to camp, calling to him with
their appealing “Psst, psst;” and it was only with
great difficulty that he finally evaded them and
left them in their native bush.
Quite unknown to the other members of the
party, Podge made good use of this splendid


opportunity for studying the marsupials, particu-
larly the pouch in which the growing young are
carried and nurtured. The birth of the kangaroo
had long been —and was then —a subject on which
opinion was widely divided.* Podge’s investi-
gations enabled him subsequently to take an
intelligent part in discussions on this very inter-
esting and unique species of animal.
Frank introduced the party to the caretaker of
the caves, whom he knew very well —an inter-
esting man whose father had discovered the caves
years before with the aid of the aboriginals. He
very kindly invited all present to inspect the caves.
Having accepted his invitation gladly, they took
a day off from shooting and followed him, armed
with reels of magnesium wire to light the way,
through narrow and winding passages, crawling
mostly on hands and knees, sometimes even
worming their way on their bellies over the cold,
moist limestone, to see the wonderful caverns
which opened up at intervals, adorned with
glittering stalactites, and sparkling from roof to
floor as though set with countless diamonds.
One evening, after the party had finished
driving and was returning to camp, Podge was
tempted to take a last shot at a wallaby that
sprang up near him. He did not drop him, but
he could see by the trail of blood that he was hard
* I understand that the question was finally settled at Taronga
Park Zoo a few years ago.


hit and would probably fall not far away. So he
followed him, more to dispatch him than for his
pelt. Night was falling, and by the time he
reached the wallaby, which travelled stronger
than he had expected, it was almost dark, and his
mates had long since passed out of sight. He
hailed them and hurried after them, but he must
have taken the wrong direction, and soon he was
hopelessly lost.
He grew very frightened. The country was
rough and wild, the night was rapidly deepening,
and it was growing colder. Likely enough it
would snow before morning. He had no food and
no matches. He didn’t know what to do, but one
thing seemed certain, he must get shelter of some
sort. Before it grew dark, he located a big hollow
log which he scooped out and later crawled into,
thinking to pass the night there. It grew colder
and colder, until he shivered. To add to his
distress, the bugs and other creepy things in the
log seemed to resent his intrusion and made him
most uncomfortable. After what seemed like
hours of shivering and misery, he crept out to
stretch his stiffened limbs.
From away through the dark bush a faint sound
reached his ears. Hurriedly groping for his gun,
he rammed a handful of powder in and fired a
shot in the air. Oh, joy! There came a shot in
reply only a faint, distant rumble, but
unquestionably a gun shot. Then an intermittent


exchange of shots (Podge had to load by the sense
of touch), and he could hear the faint coo-ees of
the searchers. Soon they found him, and a great
laugh they had at his expense.
“You’re a fine bushman, you are —to get lost
like that!” said Frank j “and there’s no need to
freeze even if you are lost—not with a muzzle-
loader in your hand. Remember that, my shaver,
next time!”*
They all stumbled laboriously back to camp by
the light of Frank’s lantern, and by midnight
Podge was enjoying a meal of wallaby by the fire
—the best feed, he said, he had ever tasted.
When the day came for striking camp and
loading up the drays for home, Podge was sorry.
He had had a splendid time, and had learned much
in his three weeks in the bush. The party returned
to town with two hundred skins of various sorts,
which Frank reckoned would net enough to pay
expenses and a little over. To Podge, when he
learnt the prices paid for skins, it seemed the
enterprise was more successful as a pleasure trip
than as a business venture.
* A light charge of powder, loosely rammed, with plenty of
paper on top, and discharged into a heap of litter, leaves the
paper smouldering. Fan it with your hat —and there’s your fire.


CHAPTER XII
Peter Noble’s store—Bruizer, Happy, Piggy, and
Podge Shooting in the ranges—Hare shooting—
The hare drive—Eel fishing—An eerie night.
The skins were sold to old Peter Noble, who kept
the produce store near Podge’s home. Peter’s
store was a sort of market and clearing house for
farmers and bullock-drivers from the surrounding
country. There was always a saddle-horse hung
up to the hitchmg-post in front, a buggy or two
standing about, and as often as not a bullock-
wagon drawn off just round the corner, with its
team of bullocks lying down. His sign-board
announced that he sold: “Hay, Corn, Chaff,
Wheat, Oats, Potatoes, Bran, Pollard, etc.,”
and that he bought, and paid best prices for
“Wool, Hides, Sheepskins, Furskins, Bones, Scrap
Metals, etc.” There were three “etceteras” on
the selling side and four on the buying side. If
any further claim to Podge’s admiration was
needed than this, old Peter could supply it in
being father to Ben and Winker, Podge’s mates.


It was a very interesting place, indeed, for boys,
Peter’s store, and Podge derived much entertain-
ment from watching and listening to the many
types of people who came from near and far on
country roads to deal and bargain with the
proprietor.
Most of the local marsupial skins were bought
by Peter and re-sold by him in Sydney. These
were the prices he paid: kangaroos, to ten shillings;
wallaroos, to eight shillings ; brush and scrub
wallabies, to two shillings; rock wallabies, five-
pence j hares, twopence; native cats, one penny;
possums, ninepence to a shilling; and native bears,
sixpence to sevenpence.
On going back to school, Podge found himself
somewhat of a lion. It was no small event a
trip to the caves; especially going as his party had
g one —-by dray. That was far more novel than
the usual way of travelling by the coach as far as
it went, and then on by hired buggy. Of course
most people went only to see the caves. They put
up at the accommodation house, and didn’t get the
camping or the shooting. So Podge’s adventures
were listened to eagerly enough —for a while.
Then, as a matter of course, he was superseded.
Some other novelty took his place —perhaps some
other boy with a similar or even more thrilling
experience; perhaps a new arrival at the school.
Such a one was Harry Harrod, who came at
this time from Parramatta. “Happy,” the boys


called him; just why, no one knew rightly, for he
was a most sober and serious-minded chap. He
was, however, a very smart scholar, and soon
showed that he could beat them all, especially at
figures. They soon surmised he must have had
a rough time at home; he never seemed to enjoy
much freedom, and he knew very little about
things outside of school life. When Podge and
his immediate chums offered him a place in their
circle—an offer which must have appeared
glaringly conditional—he gladly joined them.
The advantages of the union were mutual: Happy
got entertainment and adventure; the rest of them
got maths in return.
Podge was now one of four—a quartet whose
close association and companionship was to stand
all tests, and to endure till they all left school.
There was Bruizer, the harum-scarum of the
four, who led in all their escapades. It was
Bruizer who knew the best orchards where the
fruit was easiest to get. He it was who climbed
the fences and took the big risk while the others
kept nicko from outside. It was Bruizer who
always spotted the jogging Chow away up the
street, and, waylaying him, spun his basket pole
round and round till the poor Chinaman and his
baskets and cabbages were all hopelessly mixed
It was Bruizer, too, who fought any fights that
came the way of the four. He was a good fighter,


and loved it. So they let him do it. It saved
them a lot of bother.
Happy, as has been said, was the brains of the
group, at any rate, so far as school work was
concerned.
Rod Spaulding, known to his intimates as
“Piggy” (though he didn’t really like his nick-
name) came of a somewhat well-to-do family.
He always had more pocket-money than the rest,
who had little. He was a jovial chap, was Piggy,
and the other three thought that he, in a way,
added tone to their number j besides being in a
measure their banker.
As for Podge, well, he made up the four. If
he had any special merit or reason for membership
in the group, it was never mentioned. The school-
master touched on this very point, one day, and
asked him:
“What part do you play, Paul?”
Podge replied: “Well, sir, the man who comes
to read our bumps says I’ve got none to read—that
I’m just nothing special 5 and I suppose he knows.
I think I’m the ballast.”
Though Happy’s knowledge of outdoor life
was very limited, he did introduce one new phase
of it to the boys. That was trapping small birds—
diamond sparrows, finches and the like. Under
Happy’s directions, Podge ma fe a three-
chambered wood and wire cage-trap, and with the
aid of a decoy bird (they first had to capture it by


wounding) the boys caught numbers of small
birds which in winter fed in flocks among the
briars along the river.
They went with Rod at times to the old orchard
owned by his people over by the Grove. It was
a wonderful orchard, although it had seen better
days. Except for one side that bordered the river,
it was surrounded by a thick quince hedge, loaded
in the autumn with quinces— not the big variety,
but the small juicy kind—which remained till
long after the leaves had gone and hung on to the
bare switches like a thousand yellow balls. It
was then they were at their best —after the frost
had been on them; so lovely and mellow.
There were some unusual fruits in that garden.
It was an old, old place. There were guavas,
pomegranates, almonds and some other varieties
that were new to Podge. There were two big old
pear-trees —Rod said they were thirty years old—
so loaded in their season that one only had to
throw a stick up to knock down a shower of ripe
pears. When the cherries were ripe, flocks of red
and green parrakeets used to come and share them
with the boys as they sat in the trees gorging.
So greedy for the fruit were these bright little
parrots that they would come within arm’s length,
and positively refuse to be driven off. Podge could
shoot them with his catapult as they hung upside
down in the foliage and tore ravenously at the
lovely bunches of cherries. They were not a bit


afraid. They ignored any sound or movement,
and not until they were badly wounded would
they let up. Then pity the one who touched them.
The savage little things would bite and screech
while they had a breath left, and die with their
bills fastened in the flesh.
There was much shooting now, and each of the
boys had a gun. Wallabies were plentiful in the
ranges, which Bruizer knew well, and many a
good Saturday’s sport they had out there. Nearly
always they brought home a couple of pelts each,
with the tails left in for soup. Returning home
towards evening, through the level and more open
land, they had good sport routing out native cats
from dead logs. These were pretty little animals,
black and white and brown and white, variously
spotted or striped. Their skins were very hand-
some, but very thin and too small to be worth
bothering about. Savage little brutes they were,
too, and if caught alive would fight fiercely,
tearing the hands with both claws and teeth.
But it was the hares which furnished the best
shooting of all. They were hard to shoot in
scrubby country. It took a smart snap-shooter to
get them where cover was thick, for they were
only seen for a second or two, and unless one was
smart and got them on the hop they were gone.
There was no second chance. Out on the plains,
however, where, except for isolated clumps of


timber there was no cover but tussock grass, the
shooter had a fair chance, and the sport was good.
Here the boys’ method was to line out across
the plains about fifty paces apart, and stroll
quietly along at the “ready.” A hare would jump
up by one shooter, who would fire. If he missed,
the hare would run from him, and describing a
big semi-circle would endeavour to pass round
behind him. This brought it on to the next
shooter, who in turn fired, either dropping it or
sending it on in another curving sweep to the next
man. There was no obstruction to the shooting or
to the view. All was clear and everything could
be seen. Each one’s performance was open to the
criticism of the others. A good shot always
brought forth words of praise, while a miss was
invariably greeted with subdued boos or derisive
laughter.
Hares were considered a great pest in the
district. They did considerable damage to pasture
land and gardens, and there was a government
bounty on their destruction. Big farmers
organized hare drives on their properties, to which
shooters to the number of thirty or forty were
invited. The boys were never invited, but Podge
and his friends sometimes contrived to get to the
drive, at least looking on at the shooting, as well
as partaking of the very liberal luncheon always
provided by the owner. The farmer’s hospitality
was well repaid, for anything from two hundred


to three hundred hares would be removed from
his property.
Mr Noble went to most of these drives. He
took Ben and Winker along with him in the
spring cart with their old blue roan horse Toby,
and usually they made room for Podge.
Each pair of ears was worth twopence, which
repaid the cost of the shot. The skins, although
the fur was of a pretty reddish-buff colour and
fine and soft, were thin, and hardly worth taking
off. The boys always picked out a pair of nice
young hares each, and Podge would collect a
quantity of kidneys, of which he was very fond.
Except for that, the carcasses were thrown away;
or rather, they were not even picked up, but left
for the dogs and crows.
A favourite pastime of the Nobles was eel-
fishing, and Podge usually went with them when
old Toby was put in the cart for a trip to the
Wollondilly or the creeks that fed it at its source
a few miles above the town. This was always in
summer; a good hot, thundery night was the best
for eeling. The party stayed out all night as a
rule, fishing in deep water until dark, then closer
in along the weedy margins. Sometimes they
caught the eels without any lines at all, merely by
walking along the bank with a lantern and stabbing
them with a gaff-hook. Podge never ate the eels,
but he did like catching them.
On one of these outings, the peace of the camp


was disturbed by a wild bull. They knew of the
bull beforehand —everybody did j he was a
notorious character named Jerry —and before
selecting their camping-place they had satisfied
themselves that he was in another part of the
property and that the sliprails were up. Their
amazement was great, therefore, when towards
midnight they heard Jerry’s well-known
bellowing snort approaching in the darkness.
Before they had time to make a move, or even
think what to do, he came charging through the
briars. He was right on them, and there was
nothing for it but the river. So into the river
they plunged. How they got across they never
knew. It was pitch dark, the more so after
leaving the light of the fire, and the river was a
mass of weeds. Somehow they found the opposite
bank and crawled out, slimy and bedraggled.
They had to wait there, shivering and miserable,
while the bull snorted and stamped around their
camp on the other side. He did not leave till
daylight, then they retrieved their things, made a
fire, dried out, and boiled the billy.
Podge had an experience somewhat similar to
this a year later, when he and Rod went for a
quiet trip out on the Gundary Plains. There was
a chain of waterholes out there, full of eels, where
they picnicked and fished.
It was a puzzle to Podge how these eels ever
came to be there. The waterholes were quite two


miles from the river, and only in very wet weather
were they connected with it; then only by a
trickle. As it was said eels had to go away out to
sea to spawn they must have passed, at any rate
for part of the way, over dry land! Of one
thing he was certain—eels do come out of the
water; for more than once they had found them
at night high and dry, where there was nothing but
weeds.
On the occasion in question the two had a merry
time. Rod had brought along a good supply of
tinned sheep’s tongues, strawberry conserve and
biscuits, and the wait till it was time for the eels
to bite passed pleasantly enough. It was an ideal,
close night, and they had good fishing till about
ten o’clock. Then a violent thunderstorm broke,
and rain fell in torrents. There was absolutely no
cover —nothing but bare plains —and they had to
scurry as best they could through the pitch dark
for the nearest shelter, which was the town itself,
some miles away. The water was running out
of their boots long before they got there, for the
storm grew worse and worse, and the plains
became flooded.
At the edge of the Grove they took refuge
under one of the big gum-trees, a most unwise
thing to do, as events proved. Scarcely had they
taken up a position and flattened themselves
against the big trunk, when crash! a terrible flash
of lightning came and struck a tree not a hundred


yards away. For an instant the whole place was
vividly lit up. Fire seemed to envelop the whole
tree, running over its branches like some ghastly
fluid, then disappearing down the trunk into the
ground. And in that one terrible instant they saw
the tree shattered from top to bottom. It was a
weird and terrifying sight. They were dazed for
a few moments, but as soon as they realized what
had happened, and how near they had been to
death, they ran as fast as their tired legs would
carry them back into the open paddocks, and
stayed there till the storm eased off.
Next day they came back to see the tree,
bringing Happy and young Charlie along, also the
two Nobles, who would not believe their story.
Sure there was the tree —a big grey gum —
its huge trunk split into three separate pieces and
thrown to the ground, the branches smashed to
matchwood and scattered widely around, the
whole being charred and scorched as if it had
passed through a great heat.


CHAPTER XIII
Jacob, the schoolmaster —Podge tastes work—About
Podge’s father —A case of snakebite —Shooting a
platypus—Duck and Dude fight—Duck is expelled.
During his last few years at school, it was Podge’s
good fortune to share, with several others of the
more advanced boys, the confidence and special
attention of the schoolmaster himself. So long
as they tried, and did their best, he was untiring
in his efforts to impart to his boys the finishing
touches which he considered so necessary to boys
leaving school. With unfeigned glee he led them
through mazes of figures in his pet arithmetical
problems j with unfailing patience he helped them
to detect the subtle difference in the use of “shall”
and “will,” or to discriminate between the perfect
passive participle and its next-of-kin, gerund. And
it was remarkable, the pride he took in their
successes.
As an example of the latter, there was the
memorable occasion when Podge himself topped


the marks for science, for which subject boys from
each of the four schools in the town attended the
“Tec.” It was the only subject in which Podge
excelled, and it was fully expected that he would
do well in it. When the results came to hand, the
senior classes were assembled to hear them read
out. To the amazement of all, several names,
with only moderate marks against them, were
announced, but Podge’s name was not mentioned.
There was a surprised, painful silence, and all
eyes were turned on Podge. He, poor boy, was
nearly in tears; but just in time to spare him that
ignominy, the headmaster’s voice was heard again.
It was Podge’s name this time. Beside it was a
score that not only topped North, but was third
highest for the whole town.
Old Jacob raised his hand. “Now, boys, three
cheers for Paul Lindsay,” he said; and the round
of applause that followed showed clearly that all
were pleased—and no one more so than Jacob
himself.*
Shortly after the incident last referred to, a
friend of Podge’s —a lad a few years older—asked
* “Tou know, Lindsay,” I said, when discussing this part of
the narrative with him recently, “you boys didn’t show much
gratitude or appreciation of your good teacher.”
“Show it —no,’ f he replied, “boys rarely do. But we felt It;
have no doubt of that. Why, we loved old Jacob; almost wor-
shipped him. And looking back now, I wonder how many boys,
in successive groups—or rather in continuous but ever chang-
ing stream—must have passed as I did through that last polish-
ing-up process at Jacob’s hands. How many too, must after-
wards have looked back, as I have always done, with a feeling
of intense gratitdde for the kindly, unselfish help and counsel
of dear old Jacob.”


him if he would care to take his place in the tele-
graph office for a week while he was on leave.
On his recommendation Podge got the job.
It was the aim of every boy to get a job, and
parents encouraged it, as they liked to see their
boys working. Fourteen was the minimum age
for leaving school, and most of the boys left at
that age. The parents saw to that, and that no
unnecessary time was lost in their bringing in a
little. That was an important thing. So Podge
regarded it as no small event when his father gave
his consent and he found himself working, and
rubbing shoulders if only temporarily with the
grown-up world. Not that he wanted to leave
school. He was glad in a way that it was only for
a week. Yet somehow that week altered things.
The thread once broken, left him unsettled, and
school was never quite the same after that.
Home was not the same, either. Big Sister had
left. A new mistress had come to the house, and
Big Sister had gone. Podge and his brothers
missed her sorely, for with her going went what
little they had known of home love.
Save that it still served as a rendezvous where
he could meet his chums, school now lost most of
its attraction for Podge. There seemed to be little
incentive or encouragement to learn. Already his
father had made it clear that he was to go to work
—at the first job that offered. That, so far as he
could see, required no great amount of learning.


Podge reflected that his father had taken little
interest in his progress at school j or, apparently,
in anything else he did, except to see that he had
plenty of work to do —and did it.
Mr Lindsay was an Englishman. His sons held
him in a respect born of fear rather than of
love. They called him “Father” —not “Dad.”
There was a something about him that forbade
familiarity j something that always kept him at a
little distance from them. He was their master,
but never their chum. He was exacting and hard,
almost a martinet.
There was only one incident Podge remembered
which indicated that his father was at all interested
in his schooling. That was when he topped the
marks for science, and his father presented him
with a book —the first real book he had ever read —
Treasure Island.
Podge grew fond of that book. In time, he
loved it. He read it and re-read it until he could
see Spyglass Hill, and hear old John Silver
cursing, in his dreams. And ever after, when he
thought of Treasure Island, Podge thought also
of the little room in the back-yard where he stuffed
birds, and associated that and the book with his
father. He liked best to think of his father linked
with those two things.
The attendance of Bruizer at school was de-
cidedly erratic. He wagged it a good deal toward


the last, and finally refused to go at all. But he still
kept in close touch with Podge and the other two,
and they went out week-ends to shoot or birds-
nest together. Sometimes Bruizer had to cart
wood, and they all went along to give him a hand,
combining work with pleasure. On one such trip
they found a nice stack of good, dry wood, ready
cut near the deserted bark hut of a selector. There
was enough to fill the dray, and they started to
load it on.
Suddenly there was a yell from Bing, a lad
who had come along with Bruizer. “A snake! A
snake!” he cried out, and Podge and Bruizer were
just in time to see a big brown snake slither out
of sight among the wood, where it had been
disturbed by Bing. It had bitten his finger. Before
the others realized what was happening, Bing had
grabbed a tomahawk, and running to a sawed-off
stump that had been the settler’s bench, chopped
his finger off! Bruizer snatched the hatchet from
him, but it was too late.
Where Bing got that silly idea of snakebite
treatment no one knew. At school they all had
been taught how to treat snakebite. They had
lectures about it every holiday recess, and there
were placards hanging on the walls dealing with
that and the “Resuscitation of the Apparently
Drowned.” They all should have known better
than that. Now, Bing had made things worse
instead of better by his foolhardy action.


Bruizer and Podge tied up his finger as best
they could, and hurried him across the bush to
the road, where they were lucky enough to meet
a passing buggy. He was taken into town, where
the doctor took off a little more of the splintered
finger to even it up. He gave Bing such a severe
talking to that they all were quite sure he would
never chop off another finger.
Podge still had his old muzzle-loader, and
always took it with him when he went to the
bush. He never attained to the dignity of owning
a breech-loader like some of his friends. It was
a tedious business loading up with powder and
shot, each measured from a flask and rammed
home tight with a ramrod; then the whole finished
by priming with a cap on the nipple. But in spite
of its limitations and disabilities, he could do
wonders with his old gun. There was one thing
he could not do, though —shoot a platypus. And
he dearly wanted to shoot one.
Often, in the morning or at dusk, he would go
down to the Reach, alone —looking for a duck
he would say, but secretly after a platypus. He
often got a diver or a useless musk duck, occasion-
ally even a good duck, but never a platypus.
He saw plenty; for by keep'ng among the
hanging willows and remaining quiet, he could
watch them swimming silently on top of the water,
with only the head and part of the back showing,
and scarcely making a ripple; while the curious


duck-bill skimmed the surface for food. But
though his shot would plough up the water all
round the spot where the platypus had been, he
never hit his mark. The short space of time
between the crack of the cap and the arrival of
the shot seemed to be sufficient for Mr Platypus
to disappear. It moved like a flash, and nothing
short of a good-killing breech-loader would stop
one.
There was a man in Podge’s street who had a
rug made of platypus skins. He must have found
out how to shoot them, for there were two hundred
skins in that rug. Of course the skins were very
small when squared up, and it took quite a number
to make a rug. That was the most beautiful rug
Podge ever saw. He had thought the possum
rugs the Noble boys had on their beds, with their
lovely soft fur and red flannel linings, were fine,
but this platypus rug, with its fur short and thick,
almost like felt, and so glossy and silvery when
one stroked it, why, it beat any possum rug —or
any other rug.
Mr Lindsay was fond of shooting, and in his
younger days had been a good shot. Podge could
remember several visits he had paid a farmer
friend of his living a few miles out on the Sydney
line. On these occasions he had enjoyed a little
shooting. Further, he had taken one or other of
the boys with him, and it was his delight to show


them how to shoot flying shots. He always told
them it was unsportsmanlike to shoot a sitting bird
or animal, and the boys always had to start the
game up before he would shoot.
“Give it a chance for its life,” he would say.
As the bird or hare was nearly always killed,
the boys could never see what difference it made.
They went for one of these trips about this
time —Mr Lindsay, Podge, and young Charlie.
They hadn’t been for some years, and they found
things a good deal changed. The bush had lost
a good deal of its charm, due to clearing, and there
was not much to shoot, as the rabbits were fast
driving out the hares.
The rabbits, introduced into Victoria from
England some years before, had bred so rapidly
in the new, warmer climate that they soon swarmed
over the New South Wales border in millions.
In the course of a few years, in spite of rabbit-
proof fences stretching across the back-blocks,
they had made their presence felt nearly all over
the colony. As the rabbits came on, the hares,
till then so plentiful everywhere, disappeared.
Where they went, whether they died or sought
other fields, no one seemed to know,* but certainly
they vanished from sight.
* It was believed by many people—and the belief seems to
have been well founded—that the rabbits were obnoxious to
their bigger cousins, and that the latter would not eat the
herbage after it had been contaminated by the rabbits.


The Lindsays found that their farmer friends
seemed to have fallen on evil days. They were
not prospering now. The good food the boys
had learned to expect at this homestead was
lacking this time. They lived for a fortnight on
pork and pumpkin. These were the only two
articles of diet on the place. It was good pork,
and the pumpkins were good. They filled half
the barn loft from the previous season, and they
were red, grey, yellow and mottled. They were
nice, well-ripened, floury pumpkins, and they had
them boiled, baked, or fried for breakfast, dinner
and tea —with the pork. Not a potato, nor scarcely
a mouthful of bread. Nothing but pork and
pumpkin for two weeks.
As the shooting proved dull, Podge spent a
good deal of his time in his favourite way, roving
the bush alone, or at most with Charlie. Among
other things, he found a number of ant-eaters —
little porcupines like the one he had had years
ago. He skinned these, not without difficulty, and
brought the skins home with him. When tanned
with alum the skins made very pretty and novel
mats for the dressing table. The black and white
spines, when in repose, fell into a regular and
pleasing design, not at all unlike a well-brushed
head of hair. Thus, quite unthinkingly let us
hope, Podge helped in a small way to exterminate
one of the most unique animals of the Australian
bush.


His mate, Bruizer, had not long left school
when a big party of boys, of which he was one,
were summoned for swimming, and all were fined.
The incident caused a good deal of gossip, not
that it was anything new for boys to be prosecuted
for swimming, but because this was such a big
party, and so many homes were involved. There
were many holes along the river where the boys
swam. Each had its own name, usually given for
some special characteristic of the hole. Thus there
was the “Stony,” the “Willows,” and “Sandy”
and the “Suck-in.” In warm weather they were
all well patronized.
The boys swam in the nude. They had never
seen bathing suits, and would have scorned them,
anyhow. The swimming-holes were well out of
view except to those who were really curious, and
at no point was there any house close to them.
Yet it was forbidden to swim in the river on pain
of being fined. The regulation seemed so childish
that not many of the policemen ever interfered.
But occasionally a happy, squealing, swimming
party was raided by an over-zealous or over-
conscientious copper.
The sudden appearance of a blue coat on the
bank was always followed by an equally sudden
departure of naked forms from the other side,
and a fast and painful retreat on bare feet over
rocky hillside or stubble fields. That meant badly-
scratched and bruised feet, and often enough a


long and trying concealment in briar hedge or
gully till a way could be found of again safely
making contact with the abandoned clothes under
the river-bank. But it was better than being fined.
Bruizer’s party must have seen the policeman too
late.
There were only three of the quartet at school
now, and many of the boys who had been
associated with them for years, were leaving.
Duck left shortly after Bruizer; or rather he was
expelled —for insubordination.
It all arose over a fight with Lloyd Russell,
the dude of the school. No one ever knew that
Russell could fight, or expected him to; but one
day at a football match on the Convent green he
and Duck came to blows. It was a real good fight.
The Dude was about as good as Duck, and they
kept it up—on and off —for an hour. All the
while they were drifting down the hill, stopping
for another go every few yards, till at last they
ended in the river. Even that didn’t stop them,
and they fought on, with the water up to their
waists.
It really looked as if one or other would be
drowned, but just when things were at their worst,
Mrs Ducket came running down the hill, holding
up her hands and calling out, “Jim, oh, Jim! Is
that my Jim fighting?” The fight was settled all
in a hurry then, and the crowd of boys —both


teams and all the barrackers —scattered in all
directions. All but Duck.
Duck never told how he got on at home. He
was in disgrace at school after that, and got several
floggings j but these only made him stubborn and
rebellious, and finally he was expelled.


CHAPTER XIV
Podge leaves school—Plumbers’ nipper and printers’
devil—Newspaper adventures—Bushrangers and bul-
lock-teams—Hunting in the ranges—Snapper and his
“dorgs.”
Podge regretted that his own leaving was some-
what similar. It had this difference; however,
he was not sent home, but left of his own accord
—through a disagreement with the schoolmaster.
Not till he was actually on the way home did
Podge realize what a serious thing it was he had
done. What an awful thing it was to leave school
like that! What would they all think of him?
He fully expected his father to be angry and
send him back. That would be humiliating indeed,
and he sincerely hoped it would not occur. His
father being away on his train, Podge waited in
fear and trembling till his return next day. To
his great surprise and relief, he said nothing about
going back. He was not even displeased.
“All right, my lad,” he said; “it’s you who will


suffer, no one else. As you make your bed so
you must lie on it.”
The matter was allowed to rest there. His
father made it quite clear, however, during the
next few days, that the sooner Podge was at work
the better he would be pleased. There was no
job available for him at the moment, and so,
excepting for what he could do at home, he was
idle. He was not at all happy.
Rod, meanwhile, had left school and had found
employment in a store. Happy had also left, and
had joined the Railway Department as a clerk.
His pals soon lost sight of him—or perhaps it
was that he lost sight of them. They rather
expected promotion would come quickly to him,
and with promotion, removal to fresh fields.
At this time a big hospital for the insane was
being built at Kenmore, out beyond the Reach.
Podge’s eldest brother was working on the con-
struction as a plumber, and he got Podge a job
there, too, as plumbers’ nipper, his duties being to
carry materials for the plumbers, and to wait on
them generally. Winker Noble also worked there.
Like Podge, he was a plumbers’ nipper. They
were paid ten shillings a week.
It proved a queer sort of job. One portion of
the institution was already finished and occupied,
so that those working on the new buildings were
in close contact with the inmates. These were of


many different types. Some were confined all
the time; others —mild cases —were allowed to
roam at will. The workers treated these men with
kindness, and went out of their way to humour
their little whims.
There was one man, for example, who had a
great weakness for jewellery, and the plumbers
were never done making him rings. These they
cut from brass and copper pipe and polished up.
He would wear them on all fingers and show them
to every newcomer he met, declaring quite
solemnly that they were all solid gold or silver.
Another patient, a very big man named Peter,
pestered the plumbers to make him a tin whistle,
so that he could have some music. They made
him one —three feet long! Peter would visit the
groups of workmen in turn, especially at lunch-
time, and while one obliged him by beating time
on an empty oil drum, he would blow on his
whistle fantastic and ear-tormenting noises, in
which they pretended to recognize familiar airs,
and which, much to his delight, they applauded
loudly.
Some of the antics of these men were very
ludicrous, and both Podge and Winker saw the
funny side rather than the pathetic. It was strictly
forbidden to laugh at patients, but they were so
ludicrous that whether it was right or wrong the
two boys laughed. Indeed, once or twice they would
have been expelled from the grounds altogether,


but for the intercession of the foreman plumber,
who promised to see that they behaved better in
future.
One day big Peter came on Podge working
alone in the basement of one of the big blocks,
where he was carrying sheets of lining metal. After
the usual tune, he invited Podge to spar with
him. Boxing, next to music, was Peter’s ruling
passion, and Podge felt bound to oblige him;
though he would have preferred some other form
of entertainment at which he was more expert.
Somehow Peter seemed to sense this, and as they
were alone, he made it rough for Podge. He was
a powerful man, and as he warmed up he thumped
Podge unmercifully, till, forced into a corner, he
grew very frightened, and yelled for help.
At this critical moment, Winker appeared on
the steps, and taking in the situation at one scared
glance, dropped his load of sheet iron, which he
carried on his head, and ran helter-skelter back
up the steps. An attendant came running down
a moment later, and very meekly Peter allowed
himself to be taken away and confined. Podge
was very sore and thoroughly frightened. So was
Winker, and neither of them ever trifled with a
patient after that.
It grieved Podge very much to see this big nest
of buildings—really a town in itself —being built.
The land it covered was to him hallowed —in a
way. It was one of the boys’ best nesting grounds.


Part of it, too, was open pasture where they had
gone every autumn after the rains to gather mush-
rooms, which grew there abundantly. Podge did
not see the finish of the construction. Tom left
the job before all the buildings were finished,
and Podge went with him.
Tom was off to join the rush to Coolgardie,
in Western Australia. Rich gold had been dis-
covered there, and men were streaming in from
all over the world. Catching the fever, Tom gave
up his plumbing job, and went. Podge knew
instinctively that Tom’s decision to go was not
altogether due to the gold. Life at home was
not all it might have been, and Podge would
gladly have gone with him if it had been possible.
He went with a few of Tom’s closest chums —to
see him off at the train, and felt very sorry to see
him go. A strong feeling came over him that his
brother would never come back. And, indeed, he
never did.
After Tom left, Podge got a job at the local
newspaper office, and for some months he was a
printer’s devil. That was his high-sounding title;
though why he was called that he never found out.
He did all the odd jobs about the place, from
sweeping the office to cleaning formes of inky type
with a scrubbing brush and caustic lye. He learned
to print handbills and tickets on a treadle machine,
and helped to feed sheets into the newspaper
press. He helped the printer to mould compo-


sition rollers for the printing machine (the
“compo.” cut in small squares and rolled in sugar
made wonderful jujubes to hand round to his
chums) and he looked after the watchdog.
Oh, yes; the big watchdog; that was an import-
ant part of his work. A whole shin of beef and
two stale loaves were his daily ration. Podge had
to buy these and prepare them. The shin he made
into soup in a bright shiny kerosene tin, and the
bread was added to it afterwards. The soup smelt
and indeed was very good. The afternoons were
cold, and Podge’s appetite was young and healthy.
He soon learned to help himself before he fed the
big St Bernard.
There was a lumber room at the office where
piles of old issues of the paper were stowed. When
"he went his rounds cleaning up, Podge lingered
in the lumber room reading the old files, some of
which ran well back into the convict days. Some
of the early records of the district were very inter-
esting, and took him back to a time long before
the railways came, when all carrying was done by
bullock-teams. And there were stirring reports
of hold-ups by bushrangers and of skirmishes
between them and the troopers. As Podge read
them he forgot all about the printing office and
his work, and his mind wandered glamorously
back to those wild, rough times.
The days of the bushrangers had gone now, and
perhaps it was a good thing; Podge was not sure.


The bullock-teams were going too. It would be
a pity when they were gone, he thought. Branch
railways were beginning to replace them, but as
yet there were a good many left. It was no
unusual thing, indeed, to see the main street —the
very street in which the office stood—cluttered up
with bullock-wagons, with the bullocks lying about
the roadway lazily chewing the cud, while
provisions were being loaded on the wagons for
the home journey.
Yes, he would be sorry to see the bullocks go.
To him they were a pleasing link with a romantic
time that was only just past; they and the coaches
that still ran to the outlying towns. Each of the
old hotels had a big yard and “Good Stabling,”
and in front of one or the other of them each day
a shabby coach, with two or three horses and a
seedy driver armed with a long whip, stood ready
to start for Braidwood or Grabben Gullen or
Crookwell or some such place. A passenger or
two would climb aboard, a few carpet bags and
portmanteaux were strapped on top or behind, the
Post Office boy handed up the mail-bag to the
driver, and with a crack of the whip and a
“Giddup” the coach threaded its way through the
bullock-wagons and was off.
It chanced that something happened while
Podge was at the paper office which seemed to
Indicate that all this would soon be changed, and
changed not altogether by the coming of the


branch railways. There appeared in town one day
a curious buggy, with no horse, and driven by an
engine. It was a queer thing, and the driver
looked so strange perched up in front with nothing
to drive. The buggy made a good deal of rattle
and left a trail of smoke wherever it went. It
was an object of great interest and curiosity, and
people eagerly patronized it at a shilling a ride
down the street.
It was the first horseless carriage to be seen in
the town —the first it was said, to come into the
country. For a while it was the talk of the place.
Most people regarded it more as a joke, but some
took the view that it was the beginning of the
end for horses.
The old printer said as much one day when the
men of the composing room were discussing the
“buzz-buggy.” He said the thing would be
improved and developed and in a few years
displace horses altogether. The others laughed at
him, and said he was mad.
“Well,” he told them, pulling his old pointed
beard, “you wait and see!” And of course that
is all they could do, or he either —wait and see.
Podge greatly increased his knowledge at the
newspaper office. Naturally he came in contact
with various kinds of people there, and new
avenues of thought were opened to him. He
learned, for one thing, to read. Till then he had
read little of anything, and that little had been


chiefly rubbish. But here he was advised by the
editor to visit the public library. Taking his advice
he soon made the close acquaintance of Rider
Haggard and Robert Louis Stevenson. To the
latter he had already been introduced through
Treasure Island. But Podge did not become a
bookworm, nor did he grow fond of high-class
literature 5 he simply learned to read the right
books and to appreciate them.
At the office, too, he gained his first inkling into
politics. The first steps towards federating the
Australian Colonies were then being taken, and
many speakers came to the town to address the
people on the question of federation. They usually
spoke from an hotel balcony or from a street
corner. Edmund Barton —they called him “Toby”
—and George Reid, a funny little fat man with
an eye-glass on a string, were two of the best
known. Mr Reid was called “Yes-no,” because
he would contradict himself at any time and argue
the opposite way to suit the people.
But politics, or so it seemed to Podge, were not
taken seriously. He did not know much about
the question, but it looked to him as if people
regarded the meetings as entertainment rather
than anything else. As for the boys, they thought
it quite good sport to take cover on the fringe
of the crowd and bespatter the speaker’s white
front and frock coat with flour packets and over-
ripe fruit and eggs. Through handling the copy


proofs and associating with the comps Podge also
learned all the latest news about sport.
Bicycle racing was the great thing then, and the
big prizes offered brought many famous riders
from all over the world to Australia. The names
of these were household words. And what a fuss
was made of them. Why, no king could have
been more highly regarded than those record-
breakers, when they appeared on the track, each
riding a machine of such and such a gear according
to his caprice or strength of leg, and each attended
and held up by a proud retinue. To pace the
riders there were tandems and triplets, even long,
sinuous sextuplets, carrying two, three or six riders.
There was football too. Football was very
popular, and of course at the office they knew
the name of every player of every team, and not
only how he could play, but how he lived at home,
and how he dressed, and what he liked best to eat,
and things he had been heard to say.
Podge was not too enthusiastic about football.
His mates had formed a team of their own —
juniors—in which Rod and the rest played. Podge
joined to be sociable. He couldn’t have the
company without the football, so he took both.
With the football went night practice and street
corner meetings. That was not quite what Podge
would have chosen. He did not care for street
corner company and the idle conversation that
went with it. Secretly he preferred home life,


and would gladly have spent his time more profit-
ably. He did continue to do a little study, and
spent some of his daylight time in the garden with
his father’s flowers. These things appealed to him
more than roaming the streets, but there was not
the atmosphere at home to encourage him. On
the other hand the street corner and the gang did
offer welcome friendship and warm company of a
sort, and these won.
During this time Rod drove a delivery cart for
the store, and this gave the two inseparables a
splendid opportunity to enjoy each other’s
company. Often Rod had to take goods to homes
well out in the country, which made pleasant
trips, the more so because Rod always brought
along plenty of eatables from the store.
Rod and Podge remained very firm friends and,
with one or two others, still had their shooting
trips. Though less frequent, these were now
more ambitious, and took them farther afield to
places hitherto beyond their bounds. The game
had become scarce around the town and it was now
necessary to go a few miles out into the ranges to
get wallabies in any number. Very few kangaroos
now remained 3 they were pretty well killed out.
There was one chap named Cunningham—
“Snapper” they called him—who got to know Rod
and became a regular member of their party.
Snapper was a great shot, knew every inch of
the bush, where to go for game and how to get it.


What he did not know about shooting and hunting
was not worth knowing. Snapper was a great
fancier of dogs, especially greyhounds—or
kangaroo dogs, as they called them. He was a
wild-looking, rough sort of chap, and always he
had with him a dog or two, as wild and rough as
he was himself. Wherever he went his dogs had
to go.
Podge didn’t like the look of Snapper at all.
As for his tribe of dogs—he would have none of
them. Rod tried to arrange for Snapper to come
without his dogs. Podge at last agreed to that,
and they put it to Snapper.
“Not me,” he said, “youse coves know nothink
about shootin’ an’ huntin’. I betcher Pll shoot
more with that little gun in one hour—hares, or
wallabies or ’roos —than youse two’ll shoot in a
week. An’ them there dorgs—look, they’ll bring
down mor’n all of us put together ’ll shoot. No,
bust yez; tike me —tike me dorgs.” That was
final. They let Snapper come —just for once, as
a try-out. They found that his dogs, a couple of
weird half-bred things, would not only chase hares,
but wallabies and kangaroos as well, even in the
ranges. There, as a general rule, on account of
the rough country, the odds were with the wallaby
—wallabies being built to travel uphill rather than
down. Snapper had his hounds so well trained,
however, and they showed such cunning and
cleverness, that they headed off the game when-


ever possible and turned it from the hillside to
the comparatively clear and level valley.
Then followed a keen and exciting race which
the boys watched from their elevated position on
the hillside. Never did the dogs fail to overtake
their quarry. A snap at the leg by one of them
tripped the flying wallaby and sent it bowling over
and over; then, before it could recover its feet,
one or other of them would have it by the throat,
and all was over.
After this performance, both Rod and Podge
agreed Snapper was all right. There was no
further question or quibble about his joining them.
He and his “dorgs” came along always.


CHAPTER XV
Podge goes to work “on the line”—Cleaning engines
—To be an apprentice—Granny Noble’s shilling and
her blessing—“ Good-bye, Rocky.”
Their home town being a railway town, it was
the aim of most boys, particularly those whose
fathers were employed there, to go to work on
the line. Podge was no exception, and an early
dream was realized when he got a job engine-
cleaning at the “loco.” sheds. After all his antici-
pation and long wait, he was a little disappointed
when he started on the job. Much of the glamour
and romance left those engines when he found
himself amongst the grease.
Not only was the work very dirty, but the
companions with whom he worked were not all
of the nicest. Only one thing about the job was
good—the pay. That was much higher than any
he had previously received. Moreover, the work
led to a better position—in time a cleaner became
a fireman, and finally a driver. But having once


had a taste of working among clean, well-dressed
people, this work did not appeal to him. Even
the allurement of one day becoming a driver lost
much, for Podge soon came to the conclusion
that engine-drivers (even though his own father
was one) were a self-centred and very narrow
class of men, to which he did not wish to belong.
That difficulty was removed when an oppor-
tunity presented itself for him to become an
apprentice in the department j to learn to be a
fitter, and repair and build engines rather than
run them. His father was behind this job, as in
the case of the last. Mr Lindsay seemed to think
the opportunity to learn engineering a good one
for his Paul. As for Podge, he had no idea what
it was he was going to learn. Engineering sounded
well j but there it finished so far as he was
concerned. In any case his father had decided the
matter. That settled it, and Podge prepared to
leave for a locomotive depot up-country, where
he was to serve his time.
As his brother Tom had done, he was now to
bid farewell to home and to all his boyhood
associations. To be sure, he was only going two
hundred miles away, and would not be altogether
out of touch. Nevertheless it was a new and not
at all pleasant feeling that now possessed him.
No one at home seemed to care. No one was
concerned at his going. Even young Charlie, who
he knew well would miss him sadly, appeared to


envy him his good fortune at going away, rather
than to sympathize with him. His father, before
leaving'on his train the previous day, had bidden
him good-bye, and delivered himself of an
admonition which, though well-meant enough,
failed utterly because of its hardness. No —nobody
cared.
But wait; there was someone. There was one
friend to whom he could turn with confidence for
a word of encouragement. That was Granny
Noble, Ben’s mother and Winker’s. Podge had
never known Granny to fail. She had been their
neighbour ever since he could remember —and
before that. Away back when her Benny and he
were toddlers together, when they used to meet
at the peep hole in the dividing fence to tell each
other their little secrets, he remembered it was
big, kind Granny who used to come to the same
place and talk to his own little mother over the
fence. And he remembered his mother had cried
once or twice, and he and Benny, half frightened,
had wondered why. And at those times big Granny
had petted his mother and cried with her.
Then, when his mother died, it was Granny who
had comforted him (poor little motherless lamb,
she called him) and ever since she had been his
kind friend, and he had been her Paul . . . Yes,
Granny would want to see him and say something
to him before he went away.
So he set off with his bag, stuffed tight with as


many of his things as he could cram in, on his
shoulders, and stopped at the corner to see her.
Sure enough, there she was, the dear old thing,
waiting for him.
“I knew ye’d come and see me before you went,
Paul, my boy. Bless your heart, it’s sorry lam
you’re going. But there, it’ll make a man of ye,
and your shoulders are broad enough. Ye’ll make
new friends up-country there, and ye’ll be all
right. Keep away from the drink, my boy, and
do nothing ye’ll be ashamed of. Then there’s
nothing at all can harm ye. And ye’ll come home
first chance ye get to see us all.”
She gave him her blessing and a shilling for a
keepsake; then she kissed him good-bye. Podge
carefully stowed the shilling away in his breast
pocket, secretly vowing he would keep it for
ever.* He tried to say something, but found he
couldn’t, and he was glad when Ben, who, loyal
to the last, had come to carry his bag for him,
hurried him off to the train.
Rod was at the station, and so was young
Charlie, although he had been sent to school an
hour before. No one had much to say. They all
felt awkward. Podge was not sorry that there
was but little time left. He welcomed the old
head porter’s call: “Yarra, Breadalbane, Gunning,
* “By the way, Lindsay,” I asked Paul some years ago,
“what became of Granny’s shilling?” "Well,” he said, “it was
stolen from me ten years later—in Montreal. But I still haYe
what she gave me with it. No one can ever steal that, old
chap.”


Yass and Harden on the other platform, please.
Paper train, passengers only; hurry on, please!”
“Good-bye, boys!” he called back bravely over
the tracks when he had secured an empty compart-
ment and dropped the window. “I’ll write and
let you know how I get on, and don’t forget to
write to me, everybody. She’s off. ’Bye, Rod;
’Bye, Ben; ’Bye, Chil ’Bye!”
He raised the window as the train pulled out
and hurried to the other side. There, slipping
quickly away, was the river, and beyond was the
Grove, and beyond that again, shining almost
white in the hot morning sun, was Rocky. He
was leaving it all. The train was taking him away.
He hadn’t realized till now. No more rambles
in the bush; no more swims in the river; no more
shooting and hunting. The boys, the birds, Snapper
and his dogs—it was all finished. He w r as going
away —to work.
It dazed him. Going away to work —appren-
ticeship—to serve his time. What for? Couldn’t
a boy stay with his friends? Why should he
have to go away? Oh, pshaw! But a fellow
must grow up; must be a man some time. Yes,
of course; anyone, ought to know that. Well,
he’d just take one more look, and that would end
it.
Podge had the compartment all to himself. He
looked out. The train had left the town far
behind. Only the point of Rocky Hill was


showing—just the tips of the rough old barren
rocks on top. Rocky seemed to be stretching her
neck to catch a last glimpse of him. Rocky was
speaking to him; saying good-bye. No one else
could hear —only the two of them.
“Good-bye, old Rocky,” he said, and kissed his
hand to her. “I’m going away. Got to leave you,
old friend. Got to grow up, you know. Got to
be a
He pulled back into the carriage. Then he
buried his face in the seat, and —well, no one else
was there.
Halstead Printing Company Limited,
Arnold Place, Sydney






02112527
3 1508


