

i
i
*
ZOOLOGY OF AUSTRALIA:
Bead at the Boyal Society of Tasmania, April 14, 1885.




ZOOLOGY OF AUSTRALIA:
BY THE
HON. W. MACLEAY, M.L.C.
[Read April 14, 1885.]
to ass/c >3.0*4.
's -f r/
The Fauna of Australia is, taking the Animal Kingdom as a
whole, extremely rich and varied; it is also more distinctively
local in its general character than that of any other large area
of the earth’s surface. But, though the strictly Australian
character exists throughout, the Fauna varies considerably in
different parts of the country, the variations being evidently
caused in some instances by differences in soil and climate, and
in others by contiguity to other Zoological regions.
Those which are produced by soil and climate alone, —such,
for instance, as the marked difference in the Fauna of the East
Coast Districts and the huge basin of the interior west of the
Coast range,—are evidently mere changes in the indigenous
Fauna, brought about by the instrumentality of these causes
exercised over an immense period of time ; while the still more
marked distinctions between the Zoological productions of the
southern and temperate regions of Australia and the tropical
northern parts, though, no doubt, also much influenced by
climate, may also be traced to the vicinity of the Indo-Malayan
islands and seas, from which, undoubtedly, many of the
North Australian Birds, Butterflies, Fishes, &c. have been
derived. Wallace, in his great work on “ The Geographical
Distribution of Animals,” divides his Australian Region into —
1, The Austro-Malayan; 2, The Australian ; 3, The Poly-
nesian ; and 4, The New Zealand Sub-regions.
It is to the second of these only, the Australian—the Islands
of New Holland and Tasmania—that the following observations
will apply. But of the Zoology even of this limited portion
of the whole region there is yet much to be learnt. Large
portions of the north-west and centre of Australia are still a
terra incognita, and even in the best known districts the smaller
forms of Animal life have been but little investigated.
To begin with the Sub-kingdom VE RTEIi RATA. The
Class first in rank and importance is the IWEammalian, and
in this Australia occupies certainly the most unique position in
the universe. The absence of most of the Orders of this Class
common in other parts of the world, and the prevailing


presence of Orders almost unknown except in Australia, are
the most remarkable features of the Mammalian Fauna in
Australia. The paucity of numbers is also a striking feature,
the entire number of known species not exceeding 160 of all
Orders.
The BIMANA are represented by a variety or species of
the genus Homo, supposed to have migrated from countries
north of Australia at some remote period. The Australian
Blackfellow, as he is called, is believed to belong to the
division of the human race known as the “ Oceanic Negro,”
and though he does not present much resemblance to the
Papuan, there can be little doubt but that both races emanate
from the same source or centre.
The Order QUAD HUMANA is entirely absent from
Australia. The FERJE are also unrepresented, with the
exception of the Native Dog (Canis dingo), which in all
probability is only coeval with man as an inhabitant of Aus-
tralia. The PINNIPEDIA are represented by a few species
of Seals, common to other parts of the Pacific as well as the
Australian Coasts.
The CETACEA are mostly of wide range, and can scarcely
be said to belong to any country ; but the seas round Australia
abound in whales of several species, and the shores swarm with
porpoises. One genus, however, is peculiar to the warm seas of
Northern Australia, —a species of Manatee (Halicore Dugong),
an animal much valued for the medicinal qualities of the oil
wdiich it yields.
The important Order UNGULATA is entirely absent from
Australia. There is not even a Native Pig, though two
species are found on the adjacent island of New Guinea.
Since the advent of the white man all, or nearly all, of the
most useful animals of this Order have been successfullv
acclimatized. The Orders PROBOSCIDEA, EDENTATA,
and INSECTIVORA are also totally unrepresented. The
CHIROPTERA number about 30 species; of these five belong
to the PTEROPODIDiE or Frugiverous Bats, generally
called Flying Foxes, and they are all probably importations
from New Guinea and the islands of the Dutch Archipelago.
The Insectivorous Bats are chiefly of the genera Harpyia,
Mollosms, Taphozous, Rhinolophus, Nyctophilus, Scotophilus,
Yespertilio, and Nycticejus.
The great Order of is limited in Australia to
about 27 species of the Family Murid.®, and these are dis-
tributed thus : —l5 species are placed in the genus Mns, nine
in the genus Hapalotis, a genus only differing from Mus in
the large ears and elongated tail, and three or four species of
the genus Hydromys, the Beaver Rats of Australia and
Tasmania.


But it is in the remaining two Orders of the Mammalia that
Australia shows the greatest dissimilarity to the rest of the
world.
The MONOTREMATA and MARSUPIALIA, the two
Orders in question, comprise all the Implacental Mammalia
known. The first of these, the MONOTREMATA, consists
of two genera only —Echidna and Ornithorhynchus —the first
(Echidna three species—one found in New Guinea;
and the other (Ornithorhynchus) of one species, exclusively
Australian. The embryology and true position of these
animals have long been a puzzle to naturalists ; but investiga-
tions lately made by Mr. Caldwell, Fellow of Cains College,
Cambridge, are likely to set all doubts at rest for ever. The
results of his labours have not yet been published, but it is
known that he has ascertained beyond question that both
genera are oviparous. Dr. Miklouho Macleay has also lately
been making observations on the temperature of the body of
living Monotremata, and has found it to be extremely low for
the class of animals to which they seem to belong, the tempera-
ture of the Echnida being not over 85° Fahrenheit, and that of
Ornithorhynchus about 10° less, or 75° Fahrenheit.
The MARSUPIALIA form the main mass of the Aus-
tralian Mammalia, an Order unknown elsewhere among recent
animals, except in the case of the (Opossums)
of North America, This Order, to judge from the Fossil
remains, had a wide and comprehensive range over the surface
of the earth during the period known to geologists as the
Jurassic, and the inference therefrom is that while other
portions of the globe have been submerged since that period,
and re-inhabited by a later growth of living things, Australia,
or the greater part of it, has remained unchanged, except to
the extent produced by extensive denudation and deep alluvial
or glacial deposits during countless ages. Geological discovery
bears out this hypothesis, inasmuch as it has demonstrated the
existence, in the filled-up cavities of the Silurian Limestone
Rocks and the deep Pleistocene deposits found throughout
Australia, numerous bones of Mammals of extinct species, and
some of gigantic size, but all Marsupial.
The existing Marsupials of Australia number a little over
100 species, and these may be very naturally divided into five
groups, which very faintly represent, or are supposed to repre-
sent, some of the missing Orders of the Placental Mammals.
Thus the grass-eating Kangaroos are said to represent theUNQu-
lata ; the Leaf-eaters—Opossums, Flying Squirrels, &c.—
the Rodents; the Entomaphaga, the Insectivora; and
the Sarcophaga, the Fer.e. However, these are only relations
of analogy—there is no real affinity. The first of these groups,


the grass-eating Marsupials, or Machopodid®, number over
50 species, and comprise the genera Macropus, JTalmatnrus,
Petrogale , Dendrolagus, Oxychogalea, Lag or chest es, Bet-
tongia, Hypsiprymnus , and llypsiprymnodon. The second
group, the Entomophaga, are burrowing animals, and comprise
the genera Parameter or Bandicoot, Chceropus, and Tarsipes :
they number only eight species. The Phalangistid® include
the Opossum tribe, numbering about 10 species, of the genera
Phalangista, Dromicia, Cuscus, and Dactylopsila; and the
Flying Squirrel tribe, about six species, of the genera Petaurista,
Belideus, and Acrohafa. The Leaf-eaters will also include the
very peculiar Sloth-like form of the PhascoJarctos or Native
Bear.
The Sarcophaga, or Carnivorous Marsupials, should properly
be limited to the Dasyurus or Native Cat of Australia, two
species of ThyJacinus or Tiger of Tasmania, found fossil in
Australia, and the Sarcophilus or Tasmanian Devil, But there
are also a number of .••nailer Carnivorous Marsupials through-
out Australia which can scarcely be classed with these extremely
ferocious animals : these are Cheetocercus , 1 species ; Phasco-
gale, two species ; Antechinus, about eight species ; Podahrus
six species, chiefly inhabitants of trees; and of non-arboreal
genera, Antechinomus, and the very remarkable West Australian
Anteater, Myrmecobius.
One very anomalous Australian Marsupial remains to be
mentioned —“ The Wombat.” There are four species known
to exist at the present day ; they are root-eating animals of
rather large size, burrow deep in the ground, and are nocturnal
in their habits ; the abundant fossil remains of Diprotodon, an
allied genus, lead to the belief that the Wombats were once
more numerous and larger than they are now. They are placed
in the Marsupial Family of Rhizophaga and the genus Pfias-
colomys.
Class Aves.
The Birds of Australia are fairly numerous, and remarkable
for the beauty of their plumage. The isolated character of the
F'auna is less marked in this Class than in the Mammals, as
might be expected from their superior powers of locomotion,
but still it possesses a very distinctive character.
The most complete list of the Australian Birds is that of
E. P. Ramsay, F.R.S.E., published in 1877 in the Proceedings
of the Linnean Society of New South Wales. He gives there
the number of the described Birds of the country as 744, and a
few species added since brings the number up to 7CO, or about


one-sixteenth of the total number of known birds, estimated at
12,000 species.
The ACCIPITRES of Australia number about 40 species
out of a total of 600, chiefly of the Family Falcondidae,
The Strigid® are not numerous, and the Vulturid® are
not represented at all. The most noticeable species in this
Order are of the sub-genera Oypoictimia and Lophoctinia.
The Order VOLITORES,or the FISSIROSTRES, is well
represented in some of its families ; thus, the Caprimulqid®
number nearly 20 species, chiefly of the Australian genus
Podargus , and the Alcedinid® about 15 species, those of
the genus Dacelo —generally known as “Laughing Jackasses,”
from their peculiar cry —being of large size and peculiar to the
Australian region. ' There are five species only of the Hirun-
dinid®, and one of the Cypselid®. A species of Enrystomus
and a Merops are also found in the country, both summer
visitants from New Guinea. The families Capitonid®,
Bucerotid®, Trooonid®, Trochilid®, &c, are entirely
unknown.
The Order PICI is also unknown in Australia. The
SCANSORES are represented by the Cuculid®, of which
Family there are 15 species, and some of the genera, such as
Scythrops, Eudynamys and Centropus , are confined to the
Australian region. The Order PSITTACI is distinguished
for the variety and beauty of the Australian species. They
number 70 out of a total of 560 species, or one-eighth of
those of the whole world. Among the Cockatoos the genus
Calyptorhynchus , or the Black Cockatoos, are the most char-
acteristic forms. Among the Parrots the most populous genera
are Platycercus , Psephotus , and Euphemia.
The Order PASSERES occupy in Australia, as in all the
rest of the world, the most important position as regards
numbers. Many families of them, familiar objects in other
parts of the world, are here wanting, and those which are
represented here are for the most part of distinct genera.
The Nectarinid® count only 1 Diramm and 1 Cinnyris.
The Meliphagid®, on the contrary, are a Family peculiar
to Australia, seeming to occupy the position of the Trochilidae
in America and the Nectarinid® of Asia. They are very
numerous, consisting of 19 genera and nearly 200 species.
The genus Ptilotls is the most numerous and most typical of
the group.
The Certhii)® and Sittid® are represented by a few species
of Climacteris , Orthonyx, and Sittella. The Pittid® consist
of one genus only, Pitta ; four species are Australian, the
others belong to the tropical regions north of Australia. Under
the Family of Oriolid® may be classed a numoer ot truly
Australian Genera, including the singular Bower Bird, several


special species, the Regent Bird, and Oreocinda and
Cindosoma.
Among the large Family of Ampelid,® there is but one
Australian genus, Pardalotus, but it constitutes a peculiar
Australian group. In the family Dicrurid.® thegenus Artamns
furnishes eight species, and is almost entirely Australian.
The LANiiDiE, Camphephagid.®:, and are
rich in species of the genera Grmcnlus , Camphephaga, Pachy-
cephala, Colluricinda, Falcunculus, Manucodia , Rhipidura ,
Seisvra , Myiagra, Micrceca , Monarch a, Gerygone, Smicornis ,
Petroica, Melanodryas , Pcecilodryas , Pry modes. Eopsoltria ,
and Menura, the last the most remarkable of all Australian
genera. The weaker forms of the Dentirostres, which may*be
included in the Family Sylviidje, are also numerous, and the
genera are almost entirely Australian ; they include the genus
Malums , Cisticola, Acanthia, Geobasilea, Ephthianura, &c.
Of the Alaudidje there are only two species knowui; of the
Sturnidas one only. The Fringillidae, the most numerous
Family in other parts of the world, are almost unknown ; the
few species there are belong to the Ploceidm section and to the
genera Estrdda , Munia, Ponacola, Emhlema, Poephila. Of
the CoRViDiE there are but four species, and these are of mostly
strictly Australian genera. The lovely Family of the Para-
disidas does not, except in the instances of the three species of
Ptilorkh (the Rifle Birds) reach so far south as Australia.
The Order COLUMBiE is rather richly represented as to
numbers, and remarkably so as to beauty of plumage. In the
north or tropical parts, the Polynesian group comprised in the
genus Ptilopis is represented by four species; a few large fruit
pigeons of varying genera are also found abundantly in Northern
Queensland, while the more temperate parts of Australia
possess a number of species of Ground Pigeons of the genera
Phaps, Geophaps, Lophophaps, Ocyphaps, Geophella, &c.
In the next Order, the GALLIN/E, Australia shows a
greater departure from the rest of the world than in any other
Order of the Ayes. There is really nothing in common with
any other country, except the possession of a few species of
Quails, these mostly are only occasional birds of passage,
and come probably from Central Asia. The Pteroclidje,
the TETRAONiBiE,' with the exception just mentioned, the
and all the well known Galling of other
countries are entirely absent, and the Order is represented by a
family of extraordinary appearance—the Megapodidce , or
Mound-builders. This family comprises three genera — Leipoa —
one species inhabiting the arid wastes of the interior; TalegaUa—
one species confined to the East Coast, as far south as New
South Wales; and Megapodius —two species, limited to the
extreme north. Of this last genus, species have been found on


many of the islands of the North Australian Coast and
Polynesia.
The Order GRALLiE, or Waders, numbers about 80
species, but they do not differ so much from those of the
rest of the world as in the preceding Orders, The most
noticeable genera are Emeus, Porphyria, and Tribonyx.
The ANSERES, or Natatores, number about 150 species in
Australia, but present few local or distinctive characters. The
Anatid® are represented by one Swan (a black one), and
about 20 species of Ducks. The genus Coreopsis is Australian,
and so is Anseranas. liiziura is also a remarkable form. The
Ganhets, Cormorants, Darter, and Pelican are, with the excep-
tion perhaps of the last, the same the wide world over. The
Frigate and the Tropic Bird are found in the warm seas of the
north. The Proeellaridce are numerous at sea, the Laridce
and Sternidce on the shore. Divers and Grebes are numerous,
and in the extreme south the Penguins make their appearance.
Indeed it may be said that all the Ocean Birds, from the Algid.®
of the Antarctic Regions to the Phcetodonlid® of the Tropics,
are to be found within the circuit of the Australian Seas.
The STRUTHIONES form an Order of which there are
few living species ; and of the five known living genera—
Struthio, Rhea , Dromaius, Camarius, and Apteryx —two are
exclusively of the Australian Region. The genus Dromaius
(the Emu) consists of two species, one of Eastern and one of
Western Australia. The other genus, Camarius (the Casso-
wary), comprising one Australian species, is also found in
New Guinea and New Caledonia.
In the Third Class of the Vertebrata, the Reptilia, Australia
sustains in a marked manner , its distinctive character. The
CHELONIA are, with the exception of the marine Testu-
din®, or Turtles, which are common to all the seas of the
Tropical Ocean, of strictly Australian species, and are found in
every river in the country; and though not so numerous in
species as the Order appears to be in America, yet when well
known they will be found to be much more numerous than is
at present supposed. Eight species only are recorded in
Krefft’s “ List of Australian Vertebrata,” published several
years ago, belonging to the genera Chelodina, Chlamys, Elseya,
all solely Australian.
The CROCODILIA are limited in Australia to two species,
so far as at present known. One of them, Crocodilus porosus, is
common about the mouths of all the rivers of Australia within
the line of the tropic, and indeed sometimes south of it. The
other, Tomistonia Krefftii, a Gavial, has not been seen except
in rivers in the vicinity of Rockingham Bay.


The Third Order of the recent Reptilia (for in this Class
there are whole Orders known only in the fossil state) is the
OPHIDIA. They are numerous in all parts of Australia,
but the tropical districts are much the most productive. In a
Census of the Snakes of Australia, by the Hon. W. Macleay,
published in the Proceedings of the Linnean Society of New
South Wales in 1884, the total number of species of the Order
in Australia is put down at 108, and of these 73 are venomous ;
and deducting the species of Hydrophid.ee, which, being Pelagic
animals, are not limited to Australia, it leaves the number of
venomous Land Snakes of Australia at 58, a number far in
excess of those of India and America.
These are all Colubrine Snakes, of the Family Elapid®,
with the exception of one genus, Acanthophis (represented by
one species, known as the “ Death Adder”), which shows some
affinity to the Viperid®, The genera of these venomous
Snakes (almost exclusively Australian) are Diemenia, Pseu-
donqja, Pseudechis, Brachysoma, Purina, Phinclaps, Brar-
hyurophis, Petrodymon, Cacophis , Vermicella , Elapocranium,
lloplocephalus, and Tropidechis.
There are 7 species of the Typhlopid® known, and 11
species of the Boid®, of the genera Morelia, Liasis, Aspidiotes,
and Nardoa.
The Colubrid® are far from numerous. One species of
the genus Coronella has been described, one of llerhertophis, one
of Zamenophis, and two of Tropidonotus. Several species of
Dendrophis are found in the tropical forests of the north ;
one species only extends into the temperate regions of New
South Wales.
Three species of the Dipsadid® have been noticed. The
extreme north-west of the country has supplied single species
of the genera Cerberus, Myron, and Fordonia, all of the family
Homalopsid®. The Crotalid® are entirely unknown in
Australia,and the Viperid® are represented byonly onespecies,
the “Death Adder,” mentioned previously.
The SAURIA, or Lizards, are also numerous. The total
number of species of the Order in the world may amount to
900, and of these about 150 are Australian, or one-sixth of
the whole. The families Amphisb®nid®, Chamieleonid®,
Iguanid®, Lacertid®, Ameinid®,Cercosaurid®, Chal-
cidid®, and Zonuhid® are entirely absent from the country.
The GEISSOSAURA are very numerous; indeed the families
Gymnophthalmii)® andSciNCii)® are chiefly Australian; the
snake-like genera Pyyopus, Delma, Aprasia, and Lialis are
solely so. The same is the case with the Gymnophthalmic
genera, Cryptohlepharus , Moretria , Menelia, Miculia , and
Serista. The Australian genera of the Scincidae are Hinulia,
Mocoa, Lyyosoma, Tetradactylus, Ilpmieryis, Chelomeles ,


Omolepida, Siaphos, Mhodoua, Soridia , Tvachydosaurm,
Cydodus , Silubosaurus , Egernia , Tropidoleipsma.
The NYCTISAURA are also fairly numerous, and are
represented by the genera Ac dura, Straphura, Diplodacfylu*,
Peripia, Gehyra, Goniodactylus , and the very peculiar and
strictly Australian genus Phyllurus.
The tribe of the STROBILOSAURA is confined in Aus-
tralia to the family and to the genera Tiaris ,
Chelosauria, Gindalia , Physignathus, Chlamydosaurus, Lop-
hognathus, Diporophora , Grammatopkora (many species), and
the very remarkable genus, Moloch.
The Class Amphibia is limited in Australia to the one
Order, the Batralihia Salientia, or Tailless Amphibia.
The Ccec'dida and the Urodela are unknown. The number of
described species is about 50, and nearly half of these belong
to the family of Hylidce, or Tree Frogs, and none of the genera
of that family are peculiar to the country.
The on the other hand, exhibit a decidedly local
character; the genera Myzophyes , Lymnodynasfes, Cryptolis,
Crinia, Hyperolia , Cheiroleptis , Heleioporovs , Pseudophryne ,
Notadon , and Myobatrachm being strictly Australian.
The Fifth Class of the Vertebrata, the Pisces, are very
numerous in Australia, They were catalogued by the Hon.
W. Macleay, F.L.S., at 1291 species in 1883, and as over 100
species have since been described by Chas. de Vis, Director of
the Queensland Museum, they may now be estimated at 1400,
or one-seventh of the total number of species of fish on the
globe, which may be roughly taken at 10,000, There is, as
might be expected from the limitless nature of the element
they inhabit, less speciality among the Fishes than among the
Land Animals ; but still there is sufficient to give an easily
recognisable character to the Australian Fauna. The Fresh-
water Fishes, though not numerous, are solely, or almost solely,
of genera unknown elsewhere. The Fishes of the Sea Coast
are to a much less degree distinct from those of other places,
while the Ocean, or Deep-sea Fishes, seem to differ very little
from those of the rest of the world.
There are among this Class also, as with the Birds, wide
differences in the Fauna in different parts of Australia, arising
from climate, temperature, currents, and other causes ; thus
the Fishes of the Victorian, South Australian, and Tasmanian
Coasts are almost entirely different from those of the warm
regions of the north, where the Polynesian type predominates ;
mixed towards the north-west with Indo-Malayan forms; while
the coast of New South Wales, with its warm current, forms


the meeting-ground of the Fishes of both zones. The Fishes
of the West Coast are hut little known.
There are about 200 species of Percoid Fishes in Australia. Of
the group Percina, there are a few species of Lates, which are
the best fishes of the East Coast and Victorian rivers of strictly
Australian genera— Microperca and Enoplosus, The Ser-
ranina or Rock Cod groups are numerous, the genus Serranus
generally occupying the warmer seas, and Plectropoma the tem-
perate ; Mesoprion is also numerously represented. There are
several other genera, but the most distinctive are Myriodon and
Glaucosoma. There are two species of Priacanthus in Aus-
tralian waters. The Apogonina are small fishes, and present
no forms of a marked local character. The genus Amhassts
is found in the north, but in other parts its place seems to be
occupied by Pseudo-amhassis, a genus only found in Australia;
Edelia, Acanthoperca, and Mannoperca are also Australian
genera belonging to this group. Some species of the genera
Apogon and Apogonichthys are inhabitants of fresh water, and
Castelnau’s genus Gulliveria is entirely a river fish. The group
Grystina consists, with a few exceptions, of freshwater fishes,
mostly of considerable size and great value. The chief excep-
tion to this rule is the genus Arripis, of which there are two
species ; the one best known, Arripis solar, the Salmon of the
Colonies, is a handsome fish of large size, which frequently
appears on the coast of New South Wales and Victoria in
large shoals, and is most destructive to other fish; it is of little
value for food, and in form and habit resembles more one of
the raptorial Scombri dee than a true perch. The Freshwater
genera of this group are Oligorus , the genus of the far-famed
“ Murray Cod,” of which some species are found in rivers on
the Eastern Coast, and also in salt water. Ctenolates, several
species, fine fish inhabiting the Murray system of rivers;
Murrayia , the same; JRiverina, the same ; Doles, northern
rivers; and Therapon, many species inhabiting all rivers, and
some species Murine Fishes.
The group Pristiromtna contains a number of species of
the genera Pristipoma, Dagrammo, Gerres , Scolopsis, Dentex,
Apharens, &c.; only two genera seem remarkable—llypero-
glyphe and Histiophorus: the latter contains two species,
large fishes, and apparently very rare.
The Squamipinnes are rare in the temperate parts of the
Australian seas; but in the tropical . regions the genera
Chododon, Heniochvs, Holacanthvs, and Chelmo become
abundant. The genera Scorpis and Atypus placed in this
family are almost exclusively Australian forms. The
are only represented by a very few species of Plesiops and
Trachinops , Australian forms, to which may be added the
genus Ruppellia of Castelnau. The true Nandidas (fresh-


water fishes), are unknown. The number about 12
species of the genera Tjpeneus, Upei aides, and Midhides;
they are most abundant in the warm seas.
The SpARiDiE are numerous. The section of these which
are vegetable feeders and have incisor teeth is largely repre-
sented by the genera Glrella (Blackfish), Pachymetopon,
Tephrceops, and haplodactylus; those with molar teeth embrace
some of the most valuable food fishes of the country, including
species of Payrus (the Schnapper), Ckrysophrys (the Black
Bream), Lethrinus, and Sphceradon. The Cirrhitidcc, also
very valuable as food fishes, are represented by genera entirely,
or almost entirely, Australian; these are Latris (the Trumpeters),
Chilodactylus (the Morwhangs), Nemodactylus, Dactylophora,
Psilocranlum, and Mendosoma, —this last a Chilian genus.
The ScorPjENlDas are more remarkable than numerous;
Sehastes and Scorpteena are widely distributed genera, but the
others are for the most part confined to Australian waters, and
are some of them of peculiar forms. Among these are 6rhyp-
tanchen, Pteros , Centropocjon (some of them river fish),
lloloxenus, Pentaroye (the Forty-skew), Ayriopus, Aploactis ,
and Synancidium.
The Tp.uTHiDiDiE number about 10 species, with one or two
exceptions all inhabitants of the coral reefs of the north, and of
wide range. The Berych>A3 are few; there is a fine Bcryx
(the Nanygai), found on the East Coast. Three species of
Trachichthys (a very extraordinary form, peculiar to Australia
and New Zealand) are known. Monocentris is said to have
been found, and the few species of My riprist is and Hola~
centrum included in the list of Australian Fishes are all from
the tropical parts of the country.
There are five or six species of the of the genera
Pempheris, Neopempheris, and Kurtus. The Polynemid.®
are met with chiefly in the estuaries of the Queensland rivers,
and even in fresh water; there are in all six species known to
be inhabitants of Australia, and some of these attain a Great
size.
Six or seven species of SciiENiDA3 are also found in
Australia. The Sciaena of the Mediterranean is said to be
the same as the Australian Scicena Antarctica . OtoJithus,
or Teraglin, is a well-known Fish in Sydney. The other
two genera, Cortina and Umhrina, seem to frequent the
estuaries and river mouths of Queensland. The XiPiinoiE
and T rich iuri lee are represented, but being Fishes of
enormous range they present no Australian peculiarity.
The Acanthurida3 are numerous, but inhabit chiefly
the coral seas of the North and for the most are identical
with the species of the Polynesian seas. The CARANGiDiE are
in Australia, as in some other parts of the world, a most


important family. They number about 40 Australian species,
chiefly of the genus Cavan , and are most abundant in the
warm latitudes, while the genus Seriola, including the “ King
Fish ” and “ Samson Fish ” of Sydney, and the “ Yellow Tail ”
of Melbourne, Ashes of very large size, are only found in the
temperate zones. The genus Neptonemus is the only one of
limited range, and that extends to New Zealand. The NomeidjE,
CoRYPHJENiDjE, and Cyttidas, everywhere families of small
extent, are in Australia represented by two species each,
Nomens Gronovii and Platyslathens cultratum , a genus
limited to Norfolk Island and New Guinea, of the first of
these families; Coryphcena punctulata, and Brama Rail of the
second, and Cyttus Australis (John Dory) of the third. The
Scombrid® are all Ocean Fishes, and of unlimited range; they
are therefore all found, as might be expected, in one or another
part of the Australian seas. All, or nearly all, the genera are
represented, and a few new species have been described, but
there seem to be no marked or distinctive local characters. The
Trachinida*: include some very remarkable Australian forms.
Among the group Uranoscopina are the extraordinary
genera Kathetostorna and Leptescopus. Among the Trach-
inina are Perris, Sillago, Aphrites , and Bovickthys, —
almost exclusively Australian or South Pacific forms.
Opisthognathus is another curious genus abundant in these
seas, though not exclusively confined to them. The
Batrachidas are represented by four species of the genus
Batrachus. Of the Pbediculati there are 12 species of Anten-
narius, chiefly from the tropical regions of Queensland, and
three species of the curious Tasmanian genus Brachio-
nickihys. The Cottina are richly represented by the genus
Platyrephahis (the Flatheads), which abound in all the Indian
seas. Twenty species are found in Australia, some of them
being among the most valuable food fishes of the country; the
other Australian Cottina are limited to a few species of
Trigla, Lepidotrigla , and Dartylopterus. The Gobiidas are
numerous, but do not seem to differ much from those of other
parts of the world. The species are chiefly of the genera
Oohius, Apocryptes, Gobiosoma , Gohiodon, Periopthalmns,
Eleotris , and CaUionyvms ; the only entirely Australian genus
is Aristeus, which Castelnau has placed with this family. It
is found in rivers only. The Blennid.® are numerous and
some of them of eccentric appearance, the genus Pataums
most remarkably so. The genera richest in species are
Petroseirtes, Salarius , and Cristiceps. There are several other
genera, but with few species. The Sphyrasnidas are repre-
sented by two species of Sphyrcena, and a genus (strictly Aus-
tralian) possessing one species, Laniopercn mordax , generally
placed in this family.


The Athehinidsb seem to be abundant about the river
mouths in all parts of Australia, but only a small number have
been described, and these, with the exception of the genus
Nematocentrls, present no remarkable features.
The Muoilidje number about 25 species; they are to be
seen sometimes in enormous shoals, and are inhabitants of the
coasts, estuaries, and rivers. The species differ on different
parts of the Coast, but they are everywhere fishes of the finest
quality, and might be converted into a most valuable article of
export. The genera are Mugil , Agonostoma, and Myxus , the
last two solely Australian.
The curious Gasterosteiform fishes, the are
represented by one Fistuhria and one Aulostoma ; the Cen-
triscid/E by two species of Centriscus and two of Amphisile.
The Gobioscidas possess two genera in Australia, the Tas-
manian genus Crepidogaster. of which there are two species,
and one species of Golmsox.
The Ophioceph ALIDA 3 are represented by one species only—
O. striatus, 81. The Trachypterida3 are seldom seen.
Regal(ecus glad ins is said to have been caught on the Tasmanian
Coast. Regalcecus Jachsonensls has been described by Ramsay
from Port Jackson from one specimen, and a specimen of
Trachypi eras All cells Kner has been lately taken on the East
Coast of Tasmania. One species of the Notacanthi, Nota-
ranthus sexspinis, has been taken in King George’s Sound.
The PomaceXTßiDiE are numerous in the warm latitudes
of North Australia. Parma and Gliphydodon are the only
genera found in the temperate regions.
The Labridte must number quite 100 species in Australia.
The genera are for the most part identical with those of the
Indian Seas. There are 17 genera in all. The most numerous
in species of those inhabiting tropical seas are Chcerops and
Pseudoscar us. The most populous genus of the Southern
Coasts is Lahrichthys , which numbers nearly 40 species. A
very extraordinary genus — Slphonognathus —perhaps the most
marvellous looking fish in existence, is placed by Gunther in
this family, and in the group Obacina It is found on the
South Australian Coast.
The next Order of Fishes—the A.vacanthini —are not
largely represented in Australia, but an Australian character is
distinct throughout. The GABOPSiBiE constitute a strictly
Australian family, having only one genus and one species. It
seems to form a link between the Acanthopteryginous fishes
and the Gadidae. It is found in most, of the rivers of New
South Wales, Victoria, Tasmania, and South Australia.
The Lycobib.® are represented by a single species of a
single Australian genus, found in Northern Queensland. The
Gadid-e, which occupy such a prominent position in other


regions, both for their numbers and their value to the human
race, are here few in number and unimportant, being limited
to a tew species of Lotella, Physicidus, and Pseudophysis.
The OpniDiDiE are far from numerous, but are sufficiently
interesting. A species of Dinemolichthys comes from the
extreme North. A Genypterus (two feet long) is found in
Hobson’s Bay. Typhlonus and Aphyonus are genera found at
great depths (“Challenger”) on the North-east Coast, and
Fierasper and Congrogadus come from the coral reefs of the
North. The MacruriDjE of Australia consists of one species
of Macrurus and three of Coryphamoides, all from the South
Coast, one at a depth of 2000 fathoms (“Challenger.”)
The Pleuronectidte of Australia number about 40 species.
They are probably much more numerous, as the use of the
trawl net, the only means of catching them, has never been
introduced into the country. The well-known genera and
species of this family in the European seas are represented in
Australia by different genera for the most part, but there is
nothing conspicuously distinctive. The Siluridje are not
numerous. Several genera are found in the fresh waters of
the northern portion of Australia, and a fine species of Copido-
glanh is abundant in most of the inland rivers. The genus
Cnidoglanis is abundant on the East Coast. Species of Arms
are found among the coral reefs.
The Scopelid.® are deep sea fishes, and probably widely
distributed. The genera chiefly represented in Australia are
Saurus and Saurula. The beautiful Avlopus (Sergeant
Baker) is not uncommon. Sropelus and Aloepidosnurus are
also found occasionally. Of the two species
have been found at depths of over 2000 fathoms, one on the
North-west, the others on the South Coast (“Challenger.”)
The great family of Salmonid.® is entirely unknown in
Australia, with the exception of two very curious genera, each
of one species, found in the rivers of the colder regions of the
south. These are the genera Prototoctres , a small fish found
in the Victorian and Tasmanian rivers, and Retropinna, also
found in New Zealand rivers. The Galaxidas constitute a
family remarkable in many respects. They are found only in
the rivers of the extreme south of South America, of the
Falkland Islands, of the South of New Zealand, of Tasmania,
of Victoria, and the rivers of New South Wales flowing from
the great mountain range of the country. The peculiar distri-
bution of these very peculiar fishes gives support to the belief
held by many scientific men that a great Antarctic Continent
at one time extended from America to Australia. About 20
species of the one genus Galaxiax have been described from
Australia.
All the genera of the Scombrescodias are found in


Australasia. One genus — Hemirhampus —containing several
species, all known as “Gar Fish,” is highly valued as an
edible fish. The large families of CvpniNiDiE and Cyprino-
dontid/E are unrepresented in Australia. One species of the
is found on the South Coast. In the northern
rivers of Queensland a large fish of a serni-Ganoid character is
found ; it is the Burrarnundi of the Aborigines, and is of the
genus Osteoglossum, a genus known to exist also in rivers of
tropical America and the East Indies. It is one of the most
remarkable of Australian fishes.
The CnuPKiDiE are rather numerous; about 25 species are
recorded in Macleay’s catalogue. They are chiefly of the
genera Engraulis and Cln pea, and several of them frequent
fresh water. One species— Clupea sagax —almost identical
with the English Pilchard, visits the coasts of Victoria and
New South Wales at certain seasons in vast shoals, but no
attempt has ever been made to catch and utilise them. A
species of the Alepocephalii)A3 was dredged by the “Chal-
lenger” naturalists from a depth of 1400 fathoms in North
Australian waters. The Symbranchidte of Australia consists
of one species of Symhranchm and two of Chilobranchus, a
genus peculiar to Australia. The Mur2enidje are abundant,
in the seas and many of the rivers of the country. The genus
Marama is most numerous about the coral seas of the north.
The two very remarkable, though very distinct forms, Lepto-
cephalus and Pegasus, generally ranked with the “Teleostei,”
are found in Australia.
The Order LOPHOBRANCHII is nearly Australian; that
is, out of a total for the world of about 100 species there
are nearly 50 Australian. Most of the genera known in other
parts are represented, while there are several genera known
only from Australia.
The Order PLECTOGNATHI is also of a decidedly
Australian character. The Scleroderma, out of a total of about
100 species, number over 50 Australian, chiefly of the genus
Monacanthus and Ostrarion ; while the Gymnodontes, out
of a total of 80 species, number quite 30, and several of the
genera are solely Australian.
A species of Orthogariscus seems to attain an enormous size
in the Australian Ocean.
The Ganoidije, if represented at all, are represented by a
very anomalous fish, peculiar to the Burnett and Dawson
Rivers of Queensland. It is of the family Sirenoideae, and is
the analogue of the Protopterus of the rivers of tropical Africa,
and of the Lepldosinen of the River Amazon of'South America.
Mr. Krefi’t first discovered its affinity to the fossil genus
Ceratodus, of Agassiz, and named the genus Ceratodus Forsteri.
The Embryology and mode of reproduction of this curious fish


has been investigated lately by Mr. Caldwell, a distinguished
science student of Cambridge, and be has found its affinity in
these respects to the Newt extremely close.
One species of the CniMiERiDiE, of the genus Callorhynchus
is feund in the cold seas of the south. The Plagiostomata
occupy a marked place in the Fauna of Australia. The
Selachoidei, or Sharks, number about 40 species, in a total of
about 126. All the main groups or families are included in
the 40 species, and one family, consisting of the genus Heter-
odontm, may be regarded as almost an Australian form. It
seems to have been common in the Jurassic period, but the
only species known at the present day are two species Aus-
tralian, one Californian, one Japanese, and one Galipago
Islands. It is known in Australia as the “ Port Jackson Shark.”
A remarkable discovery has lately been made of a large
specimen of the Arctic Basking Shark (Selache maxima) on
the South Coast of Victoria, near Portland Bay.
The Batoidei are not quite so proportionally numerous in
Australia, being only about 25 species in a total of 140, but
still a large proportion. All the families are represented, and
some of the species are of great size. A specimen of Ceratoptera
in the Australian Museum, Svdnev, is of gigantic dimensions
Of the Order MARSIPOBRANCHII, the Family
Petromyzonidas is represented by a species of Mordacia, a
genus found also on the Chilian Coast, a species of Neomordacia
exclusively Australian, three species of Geotria, a genus also
found on the Chilian Coast, and one species of a strictly
Australian genus Yarra, all from fresh or brackish water on
the South Coast, One species of the Australian Amphioxus,
or Lancelot, may be readily obtained on almost all parts of the
Coast of Victoria and New South Wales by dredging at some
depth on a sandy bottom.
SUB-KINGDOM MOLLUSCA.
The Mollusca of the entire world must number nearly, if not
quite 30,000 fossil and recent species. The number of Austra-
lian species is about 5000. This is a large percentage (l-6th)
tor Australia; but the climate, the large sea-frontage, the nature
of the coast-line, all combine to make Australia a favourable
resort for this sub-kingdom.
There is less, however, in the Mollusca than in any other sub-
kingdom of the Animalia of a peculiarly Australian character
to be observed,—-in fact, except in one or two not very
important peculiarities, there is nothing to separate the region
from the rest of the world. Of the Class BRANCHIOPODA
there are only about 80 existing species. Of these eight are
Australian, one of the Craniidze, the rest Terebratulid.® ;
six of them found in Port Jackson. The Class LAMELLI-


B RANCHI ATA, which includes nearly all the Bivalves, is
said to number in all, Recent and Fossil, 14,000 species, and as
it is calculated that there are quite 2000 species of existing
species of this Class, it is evident that they must be proportionally
exceedingly numerous in Australia. Almost all the Families
are represented, those most conspicuously so being the
PectinidjE, Aviculidae, Mytiliuae, Arcib.® (including
the Australian genus Trigonia), Unionidae, Tellinid®,
Solenid®, and Mactrid®. Of the Class PTEROPODA
nearly every Family is represented, but there are not more
than 15 Australian species known in all. The Class GASTRO-
PODA, everywhere numerous, quite keeps up its character in
that respect in Australia, The Order SCAPHOPODA
is represented by 15 species of the Dentalid®. The
Order OPISTHOBRANCHIA is well represented. Of
the Section Abranchia there are six species. Of the
Nudibranchia 125 species,of all the families. Of the Infero-
branchia three species of Plyllidia; and of the Tectobranchi a
about 50 species, belonging to all the families. Of the next
Order of the Gastropods, the PSOROBRANCHIA, there are
little short of 1500 species in Australia against a total of 12,000.
All the Families are to be found in Australia, but some in more
than average abundance. The Volutid® alone number 200
species, and Australia is considered the metropolis of the genus
Voluta ; the Cyprinid®, Conid®, Terebrid®, and
Muricid® are also very numerous. A species of the
Littorinid® of the genus Raulinia is found alive in New
South Wales, while another species of the same genus is found
fossil in the Paris Basin. The last Order of the Gastropods,
the PULMENIFERA, are sufficiently numerous, but only two
of the five families are included in the Australian Fauna, —the
Auriculid®, of which there are about 100 species, and the
Helicid®, numbering in Australia nearly 400 species.
Australia is regarded as the true home of the genus Helix. Of
the-small class of HETEROPODA, few in number everywhere,
there are in all eight Australian species, belonging to the genera
Janthina and Redusia.
The CEPHALOPODA are abundant on the Australian
Coasts. There are two species of Nautilus , one of Spirilla,
four of Sepia , two of Sepiola, ten of the Loliginidce , three of
Octopus, and three of the Argonautidce. The Class
TUNICATA are apparently very numerous, the Ascidioidia
particularly, but they have never been much studied, and really
very little is known about them. Of the BIPHORA there
are four species of the Salpidce.
The third Sub-kingdom of the Animalia, the A R T H R O-
PO D A is, as in all parts of the world, exceedingly numerous


in species. Pascoe calculates their numbers at 200,000. Of
the four classes into which the Sub-kingdom is divided, the
Insecta are very much the most numerous, and the position
they occupy in the Australian Fauna will be best ascertained
by taking the different Orders in succession.
Though all or nearly all of the most important Families of
the various Ordefs are well represented, yet the genera are as
a rule so distinct from those of other parts of the world, that
anyone having the slightest acquaintance with Entomology
would at a mere glance recognise an Australian collection.
The Order COLEOPTERA is the most numerous and best
worked out in Australia of all the Orders of Insecta. The
numbers of this Order for the whole world are estimated at
80,000, and of these quite 10,000 may be quoted for Australia,
and it is probable that in a few years’ time thousands may be
added to that estimate.
The CicindeliDjE are not very numerous, and the most
noticeable feature about them is the appearance of the African
genus Megacephala and the South American genus Tetracha.
The Family of the Carabide is a very large one, and presents
marked peculiarities. The true CARABiDiE, containing the
genera Carahus, Tefffus, Cychrus, Leistus, Nebria, Elophrus,
Omophron, &c., are entirely unrepresented, except by two species
of Calosoma and the Australian genus Pamborus.
The Truncatipennes are also very numerous, but they
differ very much from the Truncatipennes of other countries.
A numerous group, the IleUuonidce, are almost exclusively
Australian, as are also the genera Xanthophlcea, Jfbmothes,
Sarathrocrepis, Philophlems , Agonochihi, Cataseopm , Sco-
podes, Silphomorpha , and Adelotopus.
The Morio group is fairly numerous, and includes the
largest known Carabideous insect (Cnmpyloenemis Schroetten.)
The Bipartiti are numerously represented in Australia by a
section of the Sub-Family of originally all con-
tained in the Fabrician genus Carenum. It is now divided
into ten genera, and comprises over 200 species. The
Feronida3 and Harpalid.® are also numerous, but are, with
a few exceptions, very like insects of the same families else-
where. The Bembidiidje seem to be few, but is not unlikely
that their small size may have caused them to escape the notice
of collectors. The Families Dytiscid.® and Gyrinidje are
not numerously represented, and exhibit no peculiar
characteristics.
The Palpicornia are few in species, but all the families are
represented.
The Staphylinidaj are remarkably few in number; the
Pselaphida3 seem to be abundant. The Clavicorn Beetles
are not very numerous, but most of the families have their


representatives—the Paussida:, in the genus Arthropterus,
40 species; the Scydma:niu.e in the genera Scydrruenus ,
Seterognathus, &c., in all 16 species; the Silphida:, in one
species of Ptomaphila and two of Choleva; and the Scaphi-
DiPiE, by six species.
The Histerid.e number 25 species; the Phalacridje one
species; the Nitidulidje 30 species, chiefly of the genera
Brachypeplus and Carpophilus. The Trogositidas are repre-
sented by the curious genus Leperina, The Passalini are
well represented; the Colydiidaj by Meryx, Beretraphus,
Bothrideres, and other genera, in all about 40 species.
The Cucujira: and all the other families are sparingly
represented. The Lucanira: are not numerous, the prevailing
forms being of the genera Hkyssonotus , Lamprima, Borens,
Lissotes, Figulus, &c.
The Lamellicornia are not numerous, but they possess in
a marked degree a distinct Australian character. The country
is singularly deficient in the large Coprira:, though there are
a good number of such genera as Onthophagus and the entirely
Australian genera Cepkalodesmius and Tesserodon. The Sub-
Family are few in species; they consist for the
most part of beautiful insects of the almost entirely Australian
genus Schizorhina , though in the Northern districts the Indo-
Malayan genus Lomaptera makes its appearance. The
Rutklidje of other parts of the world are here represented
by the very showy genera Anoplognathus, Repdmus, and
Calluodes. The Melolonthira: are very numerous, the most
characteristic Australian genera being Biphucephala, Phyllu-
tocus, Mcechidim, Liparetrus , See. The Dynastid.® are not
numerous, but there are a few large and remarkable species of
the family found in the country. The genera Bolhoceras , Tro,
and the remarkable Australian genus Cryptodus, abound in
species.
The Sternoxi are as abundant in Australia as many part of
the world. The BupRESTioA; are enormously numerous, the
most characteristic Australian genus Stiymodera possessing over
220 described species. The Throscidje and are
few in number. The Elaterida: are very numerous, the
chief genera being Alans, Tetralohm, and Monocrepidius.
Of the MALOCODERMES Australia possesses no
CEBRioNiD-iE; several Rhipicerirve of the genera Rhipicera,
and Callirhipis; two species of the Dascillida: ; and of the
Telephoriiee a very limited number, chiefly of the genera
Metriorrhynchus, Telephnrm, La,ins, and Carphurus. The
Clerida; number over 100 species, many of them of genera
almost entirely Australian. The other families of the Maloco-
dermes are very sparingly represented.
The TETRAMERA are abundant, but show a remark-


able absence of some of the most populous groups of
other parts of the world; thus the Tenebrionid® in
Australia, though numerous enough, show few of the European,
American, and African Sub-Families, and are chiefly represented
by the genera Aviarygnus , Adelium, Cephaleus, Helens, and
genera allied to them. The genus Zopherosis is one of the
most remarkable of the Australian forms. All the Trachelidous
families of the Heteromera are present, but some, as the
Cantharid® and Melandryid®, very sparingly.
The TETRAMERA are very numerous. The Rhynco-
phara alone must number in Australia quite 2000 species; the
groups formed of the genera Leptops, Catasarcus, Amycterus,
Psalidura , Oonipterm, Rhinaria, and the host of genera
formed out of them, are among the many characteristic
Australian forms in this division of the Tetramera.
The XYLOPHAGA are few in number.
The LONGICORNIA, on the other hand, abound. About
550 species have been described, chiefly by Mr. Pascoe; the
genus Phoracantha among the Cerambycid®, and Symphe-
letes and Penthea among the Lamiid®, form the largest
Australian groups. The Phytophoga are extremely numerous
as a whole, particularly the families Cryptocephalid® and
Chrysomelid® ; in the latter family the genus Paropsls, an
Australian form, numbers over 200 species. The Etjpobid®
are few, but include the noticeable genera Carpophagus and
Megamerm. The Cassidid® and Hispid® are very few in
number. The Hatticid® and Galerucid® are fairly
numerous. The Erotylid® are limited to about 10 species,
mostly of the genus Episcapha . The Australian Trimerous
Beetles consist of a few of the Aphidipiiaga, of the genus
Epilachna, and a very few of the Fungicola.
The next Order, the HYMENOPTERA, have not been so
much attended to as the Coleoptera, so that no estimate can be
formed of their numbers, but they are undoubtedly very numerous.
The Cynipid®, Chalcidid®, Prototrupid®, and Ichneu-
monid® are not only numerous, but they present some very
remarkable forms. The Formicid® are still more abundant.
The Fossores are also very numerous, the genus Thynnus
constituting the most strictly Australian group. The Apid.®
are not very numerous. The Tenthridinid® are represented
only by the genera Perga and Nematm.
The Order ORTHOPTERA is, if not so numerous as the
other Orders, quite as remarkable. Blattiu® are numerous;
the Mantid® and Piiasmatid® of Australia are remarkable
for their size and beauty. The Gryllid® contain species of
very singular forms, and the Acridiid® include some very
destructive species of JEdipoda or Locusts. The Euplex-
optera (Earwigs) are also numerous.


The NEUROPTERA and TRICHOPTERA have
been little studied in Australia, and, with the exception
of the large-sized species, are little known, but they are
certainly rather numerous on the whole, the Ephemeridte
being the least numerous, and the Termitidaj the most so.
The LEPIDOPTERA form everywhere a very populous
Order, and nowhere more so than in Australia. It is difficult
to guess even at their probable numbers; but Mr. Meyrick,
who has been engaged upon the Microlepidoptera for some
years, estimates their number at many thousand species.
The Diurnal Butterflies of Australia consist, according to
Masters’s Catalogue, of 200 species, but the greatest number
of these are from Northern Queensland, and are evidently
originally migrants from the Indo-Malayan region; among
these may be ranked the magnificent genus Ornithoptera, of
which four species or varieties are found in Australia.
The readiness with which some Butterflies change their
residence is exemplified by the passage of an American
Butterfly (I) arum Erippm , Crarn.J, of late years from the
west coast of America to Australia, and its now complete
voluntary acclimatization in that country. Euryv.ua, is the
only entirely Australian genus among the PapiliojVlDA3 ; but
among the Day-flying Moths there are several, such as
Synemon, Euschemon , Damias, and Ayarhtn. The Sphin-
oidae, Bombycidaj, and Geometridae are
numerous, handsome, and many of them of large size. The
Microlepidoptera seem to be in incalculable numbers. Mr.
Meyrick calculates the CEcEPHORiDiE alone at 2000 species.
The DIPTERA is also an Order extremely rich in numbers,
but the smaller and more numerous of the Australian groups
have never been studied. Schiner, in “ The Diptera of
the Novara,” estimates the Diptera of the world at 19,449
species, and of these he gives only 1056 to Australia. Three
times that number would probably be under the mark. The
Cecydomyidas, for instance, are very numerous in Australia,
and yet only three species have been described.
The Jabanidae, Asilid®, Acroceridae, Bombyliidas,
and Muscid.® are very numerous, and present some local pecu-
liarities. Syrphiu.®, on the contrary, are rare, and the
CEstrida? are unknown.
The HEMIPTERA and HOMOPTERA are numerous,
and most of the families are represented. Of the first of these
Orders the Reduviidje are the most largely distributed. The
Hemiptera are not only numerous but are most peculiar
and interesting; most of the families however, more particularly
the CocciDAi and Psyllidae, are almost unknown.
The Class ARACHNIDS are numerous proportionally
to the rest of the world. The are very few, but


the Chelifera and Scorpions abound; the Spiders are ex-
tremely numerous, and of many families, and the Acaridas,
Ixodidas, Trombidas, &c. abound throughout the
country. The Class MYRIOPODA comprises in Australia
numbers of Julidje, and an amazing number of species of
SCOLOPENDIDAS.
The CRUSTACEA, the last Class of the Anthropoda,
are, as far as the Malacostracea are concerned, well known.
Mr. Haswell, M.A.,8.5c., having lately completed an excellent
catalogue of them. The number of species by that catalogue
is 538, which, with others described since, will probably bring
the total to 600. Mr. Haswell has also lately published a
paper on the Pycnogonid.® of Australia, about eight in
number.
The other Sub-classes of the Crustacea, the Entomos-
traca, Epizoa, and Cirrepepia, are undoubtedly numerous,
but they have been very little studied.
The VERMES, the fourth Sub-kingdom of Animals, are
in all their heterogeneous Classes well represented in Australia,
but with the exception of some groups of the Annelidas and
Polyzoa, are very little known. Mr. Haswell has lately
described a number of the Australian forms of the Order
The Oligochasta are few r in number, but
comprise one at least giant species. Hirudinidas are numerous.
The Scolecida are probably as numerous in Australia as in
any part of the world, but no one has paid much attention to
them. All the Mammals, Birds, and Fishes seem to be well
stocked with them, all probably distinct species; but the genera
seem to be the same as in other places. All, or nearly all, the
Entozoa of man and the domestic animals are found in
Australia, but they probably came with the European.
The ROTIFERA are believed to abound. Sagitta is
found.
The Fifth Sub-kingdom of Animalia, the ECHI NO-
DERMATA, are exclusively Marine Animals, and in a
country with an extensive seaboard and a favourable climate
like Australia, might be expected to hold a predominating
position, and they do so.
The vast mass of coral reefs and islands known as the
Barrier Reef, extending from the latitude of about 25°
to 8° south, or until it reaches New Guinea, skirting the
East Coast of Australia for over 1000 miles at a distance
varying from three to ten miles from the coast, enclosing
a smooth and warm sea, and receiving through numerous
passages the clear waters of the ocean without, offers for all
Marine Animals a haven of the most tempting character, and


tire Echinodermata seem to have availed themselves of it
to an unprecedented extent. But the prevalence of Echinoderm
life is not confined to such favoured regions,—throughout
all the Australian seas it appears in various forms. The four
Classes CRINOIDEA, ECHINOIDEA, STELLARIA,
and HOLUTHUROIDEA are all very numerously
represented in proportion to their numbers throughout the rest
of the world. Some of the species of one of these Classes, the
furnish a valuable article of commerce to
China known as “ trepang” or “beche-de-mer.”
The Sub-kingdom C(E RENTE RATA is evidently
largely represented in Australia, but as yet but little has been
done in the examination of it. Dr. Von Lendenfeld has lately
been investigating the Class of Spongia, which he has found
so numerous and peculiar on the Australian Coasts as to neces-
sitate a change in nomenclature and classification.
The Order CALCAREA or CALCISPONGIA he has
found to number 53 species, and three of the families— Homo-
DERMiDiE, Leucopsiiee, and Trichonid^e —are peculiar to
Australia. The Mysospongije are few in number; but there
is an interesting germs, Bajatus, peculiar to Australia.
The CERAOSPONGIA3 are found by Dr. Lendenfeld to
be richer in species in Australia than in the rest of the world
united.
The MONATICERiE also predominate in Australian
waters.
The HEXACTINELLIDvE and TETRACTINELLIDZE
are few in species.
The MONACTIPHALE-33 are numerous enough, but not
proportionally so as compared with other parts of the world.
The Class ANTHOZOA is also well represented. Of the
Order ALCYONARIA, five Pennatulidje are found, and
GoRGONiDiE are abundant.
Of the ZOANTHARIA, the AcxiNriDiE are chiefly found
in the cool waters of the temperate regions, the Scleroder-
mata in the tropical parts, the Medreporidas forming the
chief part of the extensive coral reefs which surround the
North Coast.
The Class HYDROZOA are, as a whole, also abundant.
The HYDROMEDUStE of Australia number 243 species,
the Polyp-colonies, Avith chitinous skeletons, predominate; the
Australian and Plumularidje exceed in
number those of the rest of the world added together; the
ephemerous Eucapillidje are peculiar to Australia. Large
Trachomedusje are comparatively rare.
The Hydra is found in Australian rivers. The
Syponophara are rare, and show no peculiar forms.


Of the Order SCYPHOMEDUS.E only 26 Australian
species are known, but additional species may be expected
from better acquaintance with the productions of the seas on
the north coast. The very curious genus Pseudorhiza is
peculiar to Australia. The constitute the chief
Australian group. The Ctenophora are present in Australia,
but in very small numbers, as tar as at present known. The
Orders EURYSTOMATA, SACCATE, and TiENIAIkE
are each represented by one or two species. A very beautiful
Beroid has been described from Port Jackson. <
The last Sub-kingdom of the Animalia,the P R O T O Z O A,
may be passed over: they are much the same everywhere.
The Australian representatives of the various classes comprising
the Sub-kingdom have never been investigated.
WILLIAM THOMAS STRUTT,
GOVERNMENT PRINTER, TASMANIA


3 1508 00246152


